Good evening.
It is February 3rd, 2026,
and I call this meeting
of the South Portland City Council to order.
May I have a motion to go into executive session?
So moved by Councilor Pride, seconded by Councilor Coleman.
All in favor? Yes. We have a majority.
And I bet Counselor Scott is part of that majority
to go into executive session.
She is. Thank you very much.
I called this meeting of the South Portland City Council
to order on February 3rd, 2026.
If you wish to, please join me for a pledge of Allegiance
to the republic that is the United States. I pledge
Allegiance to the flag of the United States of America
and to the republic, which it stands, one nation
under God, indivisible, with liberty
and justice for, for all.
Thank you very much. Madam City Clerk,
may we have a roll call?
Counselor Coleman Here. Counselor Matthews? Yes ma'am.
Counselor Pride. Here. Counselor Scott? Yes.
Counselor Walker Here. Counselor West here. And Mayor Tipton
Here.
Looks like we have a quorum.
Madam Mayor, before we begin, I'd like to make a motion
to add an item to the agenda.
Uh, I'd like to move that we allow members of the council
to ask questions
regarding the South Portland Facilities Project,
which includes the reuse of Mahoney School, so
that staff will have an opportunity to fully prepare answers
before the next time that the project
is discussed by the council.
Do we have a second for Counselor West Motion? Oh.
Looks like we have a couple of them.
I saw Counselor Coleman first.
Alright, do we have a vote for that? All in favor?
Looks like we have a unanimous vote of council. Thank you.
Counselor West. Now,
do we have any corrections to our minutes?
Don't see any seeing No objection.
We're going to pass the minutes by unanimous consent.
And that takes us speedily to petitions and communications.
Thank you, mayor. Um, per our city ordinances,
we do require a number of our boards
and committees to provide an annual report in January.
So this is a comprehensive list of those
that have submitted thus far.
We do have three remaining that will be on our next agenda.
You are welcome to read through the individual reports.
There are many highlights from events
and programs done throughout the city.
Some as well as amendments to our ordinances
to enhance our programs across the city.
And then just overall advocacy work
that our groups have been doing
on behalf of the city council.
So we'd just like to highlight them there as well.
And we'll be having these on the agenda
again at our next meeting.
Okay. By our council rules counselors are allowed to,
are allowed to ask questions
about items in our petitions and communications.
Do we have any questions for the, the number one?
Yes, counselor. Scott?
Sorry. Did you say that these would be on our agenda next
meeting as well?
Yes, I did because we are still waiting on three
committees that their meetings just didn't meet
our deadline for this agenda.
Okay. So we'll have them again for,
So there will be another opportunity
to address committee reports next meeting. Thank you.
Yes. Next business meeting.
They, they won't be part of the workshop, so that makes,
brings us to February 17.
Okay. Thank you Counselor Coleman.
And my understanding is that there are four that, um,
a friendly it's not on
and they, I, I noticed it being missing and asked
and she's, she, she's completed.
Yeah. Okay. She said she talked. Thank
You. So there are four.
So nice
that we have more to look forward to.
Do we have any questions on this side of the team? Okay.
Seeing none, we can move to the second item.
Thank you very much.
So thank you, uh,
mayor Councilors and members of the public.
Tonight we have a presentation, uh, of the annual, uh,
fiscal, uh, financial audit
for the fiscal year 2025 budget year.
Um, audits
of municipalities are required under main law and the city's charter.
Uh, and so tonight, as you as the council does every year,
you'll hear their presentation, um, from Tim Gill from Run
and Kirsty Willette, the, uh, firm that the city has
to conduct the independent audit.
Um, and, uh, this will be a chance also for, uh, counsel
to learn more and also ask questions about,
um, uh, the audit.
So with that, I'm gonna turn it over to Mr. Gill
and hopefully bring up his presentation.
While that's coming up, we also have our finance director
here, representatives from the school, uh,
if council has questions for those, um, officials as well.
Thanks for being here.
Thank you for having me. Um,
before I dive into the presentation,
I just wanna say thank you to all the, the city
and school staff that were involved in the process.
Um, as you can imagine, there's, uh, quite a bit
of information that has to be gathered
and pulled together throughout the audit process,
and it, it, it is quite the undertaking.
So we appreciate all the efforts there.
Um, tonight I have just a very brief presentation
to go over the audit results.
I will mention that the audit is not finalized.
It's still in draft form,
but we expect it to be finalized very soon.
And, uh, we don't expect any significant
or major changes at this point.
So the information I'm gonna present tonight, um,
is pretty close to being fine.
I'm just gonna go over some of the audit results.
Uh, I'll give you a quick snapshot
of the fund balance at the end of fiscal year 2025.
Um, go over some of the required communications
and open up questions at the end.
So for summary of audit results,
you'll see the first bullet point there is the financial
statement opinion on modified.
Uh, the whole purpose of the audit process is for us
as auditors to give an opinion on the financial statements
as to whether or not they are fairly presented in accordance
with all accounting standards and practices.
Uh, anytime that you would have a modified opinion,
it's generally a bad thing.
It usually means we couldn't collect enough information
to give you a clean audit opinion,
or we had disagreements with management.
Um, so we are projecting to issue an unmodified opinion,
which is basically a clean opinion
and exactly what you wanna see in an audit report.
Another part of the audit process is the reports required
by government auditing standards.
Um, one of the things we do as part
of the audit process is test your internal control
procedures to, um, assess the risks within the organization.
Gives us a lot of insight as to
where we should focus our further testing.
Um, one of the kind of byproducts of that process is
that we're able to offer some recommendations, things
to improve operating efficiency, um, some best practices,
things to improve upon.
Those recommendations are required
to put into three different categories, uh, the most severe
of which being a material weakness.
Those are things you just pay attention to
and try to correct and remedy as soon as possible.
Uh, the next tier down is a significant deficiency,
not quite as serious as a material weakness,
but something you still should pay attention to
and develop a correction plan for.
And then there's just kind of other comments
that are general recommendations,
things we think you could do to improve your process
and procedures, but they're not kind
of imperative at the time at this moment.
Um, as you can see on the slide,
there is one material weakness that we have to report
regarding school department reconciliations.
It is a repeat comment from last year.
Um, as we come in for the audit process, we had
to propose a number of journal entries to make sure
that the accounting records were, um, materially correct.
Um, inherently that suggests that throughout the year,
management is not reviewing
and reconciling items on a timely basis
to make those corrections before we show up, which means
that they might be looking at incorrect
information throughout the year.
Part of those, uh, adjustments that we made at year end
as part of the audit process, um, was
to move approximately $400,000 of grant funds
into the general fund because they were either ineligible
or the grants were overspent.
So the general fund had to kind
of absorb some of those costs.
Um, One part of the audit process
that I'll note is the audit entries.
Um, this year we had 34 audit entries,
which is a quite high number.
Um, you know, it's unreasonable to think
that you're not gonna have any audit entries.
There's always audit entries.
Um, but typically we like to see that number
below 10 or something like that.
Um, so 34 is quite high, a lot
of them relating to the school department.
And as you would, as you'll see in some of the, uh,
attached documents that I believe were sent out to you, um,
the school budget was also also over
expended by quite a bit.
Um, so that suggests, again,
that school department reconciliations and,
and monitoring wasn't going on throughout the year.
The next bullet point down there
is a significant deficiency.
So a next level down in our, uh, severity, um,
transportation cash receipts.
Again, a repeat comment. This relates to the, the city bus
and fair collections, which weren't being reconciled
to ridership, tallies.
Um, anytime you're collecting fees for services, we suggest
that those, um, services
and fees should be reconciled on a regular basis
to make sure that your revenues are being posted
and collected appro appropriately.
Um, now obviously the city
of bus service has been transferred to Metro.
Um, so this is no longer an issue.
Um, but it did affect a portion of 2025,
which is why we reported it here.
Um, the next significant deficiency we have relates
to city payroll procedures.
And this was more of a combination
of several little small items, um,
that we found throughout the, um, testing
of the payroll process where we were missing a timecard
or, um, the payroll proof was not approved like
by management as it should have been.
Um, wage rate documentation might have been missing
or certain deferrals and elections
weren't matching employee forms.
So it was kind of a combination of little things that kind
of led to this significant deficiency
where we would recommend that the, the procedures seem
to be in place and they shouldn't be documented.
Just kind of adhering to those procedures a little bit more,
uh, strictly to ensure everything was
documented and properly approved.
Uh, the next item on that list there is a compliance filing,
compliance finding.
Um, this relates to the budget non-compliance on the school.
Um, the school budget is legally adopted budget,
so anytime you exceed that budget in total,
it is technically a, a non-compliance with, uh, a legal law.
Um, it's a repeat comment from last year.
Uh, kind of touched on this a little bit
with the material weakness where, um,
there could have been some improved management
and monitoring throughout the year to make sure that
that budget wasn't quite so overspent.
Um, although a lot of it was related to some
of those journal entries at year end, that kind
of swept some money, um, out
of the grant fund into the general fund.
So that contributed to that as well.
Uh, and then we have the other comments there.
You'll see school journal entry review procedures.
Um, this basically comes down to segregation of duties.
Anytime, you know, there's a, a transaction
or a something being posted to the accounting system,
we like to see checks and balances in place, um, ensuring
that, uh, no one person can affect transactions
solely by themselves.
Um, so in this instance, we really recommend
that the school, um, Implement a review procedure
and document those reviews to ensure
that management is looking at journal entries,
um, as they're being posted.
If journal entries themselves are inherently a way to kind
of bypass controls and override the system.
So you wanna make sure there's a good procedure in place
to ensure that those are being reviewed and approved
before being processed.
Purchasing card transaction approval.
Um, again, a repeat comment from last year.
What we found is basically it was improved from the prior
year, although, um,
because the audit last year was a little bit late and the,
and the findings last year were a little bit late,
process wasn't able
to be fully implemented in fiscal year 2025.
Um, so there was some approval procedures
that we would like to see implemented.
It wasn't consistent across departments.
Some departments were having management approved, um,
purchasing card transactions, some departments,
those transactions weren't being approved.
Um, so we'd like to see that more consistent across
departments, uh, to make sure
that all transactions are being reviewed
and approved, um, in a timely manner.
And then the last item on
that list there is school payroll procedures, uh, similar
to the city payroll procedures,
but not quite as, um, frequent
of issues that we found.
Uh, again, we found some missing timecards, uh,
and some payment calculation errors
through our control testing
and our overview of the procedures.
Um, so we just recommend implementing, um,
some additional review checks
and balances to make sure that those things are being
processed, um, appropriately.
And then approvals are in place to make sure
that there's no errors being put through
to employees in their pay.
Questions on those comments?
I think yes, we're going to have questions,
but I'm trying to figure out how our,
how our presentation is working.
Um, we have member school staff
and, um, school board members
and our position paper notes
that they've been invited to attend.
I don't think they prepared a presentation,
so I'm just letting council know that school,
if your questions relate to the school part, we,
we were expecting that school folks would've the opportunity
to address them as well as Mr. Gill.
So having made that amazing speech,
I think we're now going to ask questions.
And who has questions? Counselor Matthews,
My, uh, first question is
for the assistant superintendent.
Alright. Can we invite Joe Prince to come to the podium?
Hello, Joe Prince, assistant superintendent in the
South Portland School Department.
Hey, how you doing? Great.
So I just, it's, it's difficult to see this sometimes
because we, it's repeat, repeat, repeat,
but what a lot of people don't know is that our, uh,
accounting department
and our, uh, has been in quite turbulence
for, what, four years now?
Yep. I just looked at my notes In the last five years,
we have had six folks, three
of which were on an interim basis, three that, um,
were there for about a year.
So six folks over the last five years
that have certainly contributed.
We've since hired an amazing finance director
who you will get to meet next week when we meet
with you all, um, who is bringing much needed stability
and expertise in some of the areas
that we know we need to address.
And so we can possibly look forward to, uh, a few
of these at least being removed from the list.
That is the hope. Yes. Okay.
And I feel very good that it's in her hands. Alright,
Thank you.
Thank you Councilor Matthews. And you may need to return.
I think we have some more questions. Did I see more hands?
Councillor West?
My, my questions are for the Otter first, the,
just the 400,000 of the grants
that was a school district issued, wasn't it?
Or wasn't, correct. Yeah. Yes.
And where my basic confusion here is
what is our responsibility as the city for the problems
with the school district.
I mean, ultimately the school department is a department
of the city, so I mean, they're assess their
budget is part of the city's budget.
So I think there's some responsibility there to ensure
that it's being, uh, implemented properly
and being accounted for properly.
Thank you. And then with regard to the city part,
the city payroll and the city, um, the last one are,
are there any particular departments where you found it
to be more of a problem than others?
The, the purchasing card, the transactions approval,
and the city payroll issues?
Uh, not off the top of my head, no.
It was kind of a citywide thing where it was just kind
of inconsistent application
of the review and approval process.
Thank you Any more? Okay.
I thought I saw Counselor Scott's hand.
Thank you. I did, and I apologize if this is sort
of a kindergarten question, but I I did wanna ask just how
to help separate, um,
school department related financial
concerns from the city.
And maybe that's not part of this presentation,
How to separate those concerns.
Yes. Just to understand, I mean, I know you have school
identified here, but
I guess I don't understand the question.
I'm just trying to understand which departments
these issues are specifically related to.
Okay. Um, well, yeah.
As, as you, you noted, uh, some
of the school related items are specifically documented here
that says school, anything related to the city, uh,
we've identified with city
or the transportation, um, the purchasing card,
transaction approval, again, that's kind of more
of a citywide item, not necessarily related to the school.
Uh,
But they're, they're just combined
I guess, in this presentation.
Well, and partly to council
West question, question as well.
And Ellen Sanborn, finance director for the city.
So the school is part of the city's general fund? Yes, yes.
Right. So financially it's part of the general fund,
but as y'all know, they have a separate legislative body.
They have a superintendent.
There's a lot of laws they, they're required to follow
as a school district that don't apply to the city.
So it's kind of murky sometimes as to what is the quote,
responsibility of the city.
I mean, the fact that you have a financial audit
that's independent, that reports out to the council, um,
who approves the school's budget and the city's budget
and is responsible for that fiscal part of it,
um, is why Tim's here.
And I think it's up to the council to decide maybe
how they want to respond to that.
But as far as control over the school from an administrative
perspective, I mean,
the city manager doesn't have any control over
what the superintendent does.
I don't really have any control over
what the finance director over there does.
We're we're autonomous in that way just
because of how everything is set up even statewide.
I think so. I don't know if that helps at all.
I mean, we try to coordinate procedures
and, you know, share things
and we all want audits to come out good.
But in the end, we're kind of in our own
place doing our own thing.
No, that's fine. Thank you. I just want
to better understand sort of the, the analysis
and results of the audit as opposed to the, OR as it relates
to the various departments. So thank you.
Thanks. Did I see another hand for questions?
Not at this time, Mr. City manager.
So I probably asked the same questions I asked last year.
Um, if you recall. Um, so I know
that waste fraud and abuse is a subjective term.
There's no necessarily definition.
So I'm curious, I think it's important to ask this question
and have the independent auditor answer it on each year.
Did you, in your, in your review, did you find any instances
of waste, fraud or abuse, uh, as part of this audit
or anything that led you, leads you
to believe there's financial mismanagement, malfeasance,
misfeasance, anything to that extent?
Um, well, let me start off by saying a, uh,
audit is not designed to find waste, fraud, or abuse.
We designed to render an opinion on the accounting. Mm-hmm.
Whether or not it's fairly presented.
Um, but, you know, as we are diving into some
of the transactions, we're able to see some of these things
where, uh, we might find some indicators of waste fraud
or abuse or, you know,
inappropriate transactions, things of that nature.
Um, in general, no, we didn't find anything related
to those items or anything that would lead us to suspect
that, uh, there was waste, fraud, or abuse.
Uh, if there was, we would put it into our audit reports.
It would probably be part of your, you know,
the findings and material items.
We just went over here tonight.
Thank you. Thanks.
Anything else from counselors, counselor, Scott? Yes.
Sorry, I have a, don't apologize.
Completely ridiculous, uh, request just that in the, uh,
materials that we have, there are three slides named
as slide two, and then it goes
to slide five, at least in mine.
Apologies. But
We made a special one just for you. Yes,
I know. I'm sure you did.
But it's mine too, just in
a continuous effort to keep myself on track and sane.
Six five. Oh, that's a big one. Yes, she is. Right.
So two, so three and four slides.
Three and four appear to be missing.
So at some point, yes.
No, um, two is labeled, one is labeled two twice,
Three days. Oh, is that
what's happening? Okay. Yeah.
So we have cover, but there is a missing number four,
and we have one that is labeled two.
Oh. And then we have a second two. Yeah.
And then we have a third two. Yeah. All right.
So I think, how about this?
Why don't you, counselors look at your screens,
you run everything.
Make sure we have all the pages we
need. Can we do that right now?
Absolutely. Go back to the beginning. I
Think what you've discovered is
that even auditors make mistakes,
But it's a, can you I'm, I'm serious.
Can you start where you started this evening?
Your first page?
I think we're on the first two. Yes.
Right. I just wanted to comment
That the first two And then there's
Another two. Alright.
As he was going through,
I was looking at the screen, so I wasn't looking here.
Was anything missing then? No, but we,
No, we're on the first two. Yeah. There's three, two.
Yes. I see that there's more of
Your presentation. Yes.
Yes. So as he continues his presentation,
you'll notice that the number on the bottom will not change.
Yeah. For at least two more slides.
Okay. Alright. But we have everything, so we're good.
Thank you. Alright.
Did anybody bring bring popcorn for this show?
That'd be great. Alright. Please continue.
I'm glad my presentation is entertaining.
All right. So that's the first page number two.
There's the second page number two.
Um, so another part
of the audit process is testing the federal
grants that you receive.
Um, if you spend more than $750,000 in federal grants
during the year, you're required to what we, you're required
to have what we call a single audit.
Um, also known as a uniform guidance audit.
Uh, throughout that process, we, um, again,
do another risk assessment procedure to figure out
what programs are deemed highest risk.
Um, we also look at the dollar threshold to see
what programs spent the most money.
And using a combination of those two items, we select, um,
certain programs to test.
We don't test 100% of your grants, um, very similar
to the financial audit process, where we don't test 100%.
We, we do a sample based procedure.
Um, so this year, under the Uniform Guidance Audit,
we tested, uh, three programs.
Uh, the Coronavirus State and local fiscal recovery funds
or ARPA funds, the special education cluster
or local entitlement, and the Esser funds, elementary
and secondary school emergency relief funds.
So for the special education cluster
and the, uh, Esser funds, uh,
there were no findings reported.
Everything was, um, on the up
and up with those grants on the ARPA funds.
Um, we found that there was a significant deficiency
because, um, the procedure to ensure that vendors
ultimately receiving the federal funds, um, you're required
to ensure that they are not suspended
or debarred by the federal government, um,
before you make payment to them.
Um, and we could not find documentation to ensure that
that process was in place.
Um, we did review the vendors
and there were no vendors that were suspended or debarred.
It's just that there wasn't, um, documentation to prove
that that was checked beforehand.
And then one of the other items that we noted, which, um,
the title one a program, um,
which wasn't specifically tested,
but we were following up on a comment
and, uh, issue that we found in the prior year.
Um, we found that there was certain unallowable costs.
This relates partially to that $400,000 that I mentioned,
uh, earlier, where we had some overspent
or ineligible grant funds that had to be kind
of absorbed back into the general fund.
Um, the title one was part of that.
Um, and so that's why we reported a significant deficiency.
'cause there were certain un allowable costs being charged
to the program that had to be moved out.
Questions on the federal grants.
Councillor West, Just to be clear.
So the ARPA at the top, those are city
that was city disbursements?
That is correct. Actually, I believe there's some
of those funds that are also
flowing through the school district.
So that one's combined a little bit.
And then Title one disadvantage
was the school district, correct?
Correct. I I just an observation that in the future, I,
I just think it would be useful
to make clear which ones are, I mean,
obviously if it says education, you can tell,
but which ones are city and which ones are the school.
Because notwithstanding that it's a department of the city,
the oversight is significantly different by this council
Counselor. Scott,
I would just, uh, add that, I don't mean to
separate city and school specifically,
but if there is a designation
or a helpful indicator as to, uh,
the department, sorry, Scott, the department
or area that these funds are allocated to,
which the report refers to would be helpful to have.
Okay. If I can make that change
and note it for next year.
Sure. Anyone else with questions?
All right, let's keep going. Thank you. All right.
Uh, some other required communications
that we are required to communicate, uh,
as auditors to the council.
Um, our responsibility, as I described, was
to offer an opinion on the financial statements.
Uh, we do not, we are not responsible
for preparing the financial statements,
although we may assist in that process.
The financial statements are management's, uh,
financial records put into a certain format.
Uh, so they are not our financial statements.
Some people sometimes refer to it as ours. It's not.
Um, when we do issue the final reports, it,
it is quite a lengthy report, um,
because the city does issue an acter, which is kind of above
and beyond the basic set of financial statements.
Um, so it's over a hundred pages long in those a hundred
pages, a hundred plus pages, only three pages
of ours, which is the opinion.
Um, so I just wanna make that clear that, you know,
these are not auditor financial statements.
We're not making up numbers or anything like that.
Um, I'll also point out that, uh,
in fiscal year 25, there was a new GASB, uh,
governmental Accounting Standards Board.
Uh, they make the standards for towns,
cities, school districts.
Um, so there was a new standard implemented in 2025,
which did affect the way
that we recognize compensated absences.
Uh, you're sick and vacation time that's been accrued.
Um, as a result, that liability increased quite a bit, uh,
over the prior year.
Um, based on the new estimation methods and techniques.
Um, that is not a liability that has
to be paid out immediately the next month,
two months, or even a year.
It's kind of an estimate over time.
Um, and, and it change kind of frequently
as you update the estimate, um, from year to year.
Uh, other significant estimates, uh,
depreciation expense on capital assets, uh, allowance
for uncollectable receivables.
Um, usually there's a small bit of those that we, uh,
you know, essentially kind of write off
because they're potentially uncollectible.
Um, other post-employment benefits
and the net pension liability, um, those are other
liabilities required by GS B standards, um,
to recognize your, your,
your participation in Maine pers um, pension program
and their life insurance program.
And the school has other health insurance,
uh, programs as well.
Um, a lot of that is, um, developed by an actuary.
Uh, and there's many items
that go into developing those estimates.
Um, and it is quite significant.
So that is a significant estimate there, where any one
of those factors could change the estimate, uh, quite a bit.
Um, there's also certain leases, um,
or property equipment, um, things of that nature which, um,
are projected out over many, many years.
The collections on those leases projected out over many,
many years using a discount rate.
Again, that is an estimate.
So there's significant estimates
that go into advisor statements that could alter, um,
the financial performance one way or another.
Um, but we have evaluated all the estimates
and deemed them reasonable.
Um, the other item I'll point out is there's no difficulties
or agreements with management.
Everybody was very helpful throughout the audit process.
I already mentioned the, uh, 34 adjusting journal entries.
Some of them are quite large
or material to the audit, to the audit
or the financial statements themselves.
Um, and then there were also four past adjustments,
which were deemed immaterial that management decided not
to post to the accounting system.
'cause sometimes administratively the, the efforts
to post those entries and to do all
that, it's just not worth it.
And if it's deemed immaterial,
we're allowed to pass on those items.
So the one slide I have for you, um, slide number five,
not number two, um, is the fund balance analysis, uh,
as it's projected right now based on the draft
financials for the general fund.
Um, this does include the, the school department as well,
part of the general fund for the city.
Um, your fund balance is basically your assets
minus your liabilities.
If you satisfied all your liabilities,
what would you have left over to kind
of utilize moving forward?
Um, and so you can see there's,
it's increased quite a bit over the prior year.
Overall the total increase was about 5.8 million.
Um, the fund balance is required to put, is required
to be classified into different categories.
Um, five different categories.
Nons, spendable, those are funds
that are not in liquid form,
so you really can't convert them to cash readily.
They're not really available to spend.
Um, there's restricted amounts that often relates
to grants in this instance.
It relates to the school department, um,
and a few other, uh, uh, funds that were available
or they were available,
but they're restricted for a very specific purpose
and you can't change that purpose.
So they have to be spent on specific items, committed items.
Um, and also assigned items are things
that are a little bit more within the control of,
uh, city management.
Um, typically these are capital reserves,
tax stabilization reserves that have been kind of designated
and set aside for a purpose.
And they could be repurposed theoretically if the, uh,
the council voted to kind of reassign them.
Um, and then there's also a small portion about $539,000
that's also been kind of set aside to help balance the,
the subsequent budget in fiscal year 2026.
Um, The increase in fund balance,
the $5.8 million that I mentioned earlier, um, is the result
of essentially revenues exceeding
expenditures during the year.
Um, if you look at exhibit A two, which I believe was
provided as a a little snippet of your materials, um,
the revenues, the excise taxes
for revenues came in over budget by quite a bit,
almost 1.8 million.
Um, there was also quite a significant increase in parks
and recreation charges and fees due
to higher participation in those programs.
On the expenditure side, uh,
there was some significant savings, uh, related to, uh,
insurance benefits due to some staff vacancies.
And then there was also, um,
some savings in general assistance approximately seven
$36,000, uh, due to just less needed within that program.
And that all translates to, um, uh,
increasing net position at year end.
And then, uh, there's additional items which I won't discuss
too much here tonight, but exhibit B shows the same budget
to actual for the school department
and shows that where there's over
or under expenditures in various schools programs.
There. That's all I
have for you tonight there.
Any more questions?
Okay. Thank you. You took us home.
Do we have any remaining questions from counsel?
No. Okay. I don't see remaining questions.
Um, I, I do have one
and it is, um, for, uh, assistant superintendent Joe Prince.
It is, it is really, uh, pretty well linked
to Councilor Matthew's questions.
It is sobering Joe to hear during this report
about, specifically to me, it's sobering
to hear about deficiencies and reviewing
and reconciling throughout the year, and
therefore, um,
management may be looking at incorrect information.
And, um, I do understand there have been challenges
and that there have been different finance directors.
And you have said now that the financial, the finance
director that you have now is quote amazing.
And I actually have certainly heard from other school board
members, um, that they're pleased.
But Joe, my question is in re do you feel
a difference already in review and reconciliation?
Do you feel systems have changed?
Yes. And I think, uh, just sort of stepping back from
that question for one minute, just to provide context
for everyone on the city council, I think an important issue
that the school department faces that it's useful
to be mindful of is
that our contractual year does not overlap
with the fiscal year.
So about $40 million of our budget is tied up in salaries
that don't align with the July 1st.
So every summer we have to perform what's called an accrual.
And all year long we're projecting what's the amount of pay
that our teachers and ed techs who are paid over 12 months
but offset from the fiscal year.
What is for time worked in the fiscal year that then has
to get moved back.
The biggest issue we have faced is correctly projecting for
that accrual so
that we can move it into the correct fiscal year.
I feel that's one
of the most significant improvements we've already made
with our new finance director is the ability to do
that projection so that we can truly see where,
um, where we will arrive at July 30th knowing
that some people won't be paid until August 30th.
So that's a really big improvement that we
have already seen.
Another part that we've already seen is monthly
reconciliation of our withholding accounts.
Those are the accounts where over the course
of the month we're withholding for the employee share
of a health benefit or a dental
benefit at the end of the month.
Then we're writing one check to Anthem
or to Delta for all those funds that we've withheld
and checking that that matches up at each month.
So those are some immediate things
that already feel like they've moved in the right direction.
And I think the final thing
that I will say is just another layer of complexity is
that the federal grants that we work with,
and even some of the state of Maine grants
work neither on our contract year, nor on the fiscal year.
They work on a ten one nine hundred thirty.
And so again, that, uh, I think 400,000
of Title one funds had to do with sort
of the overlap in our ability to project for
those timelines not lining up.
Again. I feel like we've got a better handle on that so
that we can anticipate
that issue not happening in the future.
So a more complex answer than you probably wanted. I'm
Still trying to figure out what a
ten one nine thirty is, but someday
I, from the 1st of October to the end of, uh, September is
what those grant years work on. Thank
You. Versus our
contract year versus our fiscal year. Yeah.
So lining those all up to have them in the right place.
Um, I finally feel like we are on
top of the system to do so.
Alright. I imagine that feels good
and I thank you very much.
Oh, I think Councilor West has one more
question. Just, just one more.
Does it have to be that way that you're working
with three different fiscal years?
Obviously that's just totally inappropriate in my
Opinion. I would love
if we could change that.
I don't see a future where we can, given
that the academic year starts on the 1st of September, uh,
and therefore our contracts start then.
Um, but it makes it awfully complex for us.
So instead we need good protocols to work around that until
such day as one of those three years should change.
Any other questions
or information I can get back to the council?
Anyone. Alright. Thank you very much. Great.
Um, any questions for Tim?
Looks like we don't have any more questions.
You did such a thorough job. Thank you.
So thank you so much for the presentation and your work,
and we are gonna move on to our appointment calendar.
Um, if there is no objection,
we will postpone the appointment calendar
to our next business meeting, February 17.
We'll do that by unanimous consent.
I don't see any objections. That is done. Thank you.
Um, now we're at our consent calendar,
but first, here's the part where we read the rules
for public comment.
Members of the public are invited to comment on any topic,
on or off the agenda during citizen discussion, part one
or part two for up to three minutes.
If you are here to speak on an item appearing on tonight's
agenda, you are encouraged to wait
until the item comes up on the agenda
where you'll have three minutes to speak.
If you are unable to wait, you may speak on the matter
during citizen discussion part one,
however, you will not be permitted to speak on the topic.
Again, members of the public
who speak on the topic when it comes up on the agenda,
may not speak about the topic.
Again during citizen discussion.
Part two, we ask all speakers
to state their name and address for the record.
Do we have anyone who'd like
to make a comment about any item on our consent calendar?
We have,
We have to read them first.
Oh, well I guess we're, I'm rushing us.
That's okay.
Order number 96 25 26.
Community Development Advisory Committee
for district at large, appointing Kim Air for a term
that expires January 14th, 2029.
Order number 1 38 25 26.
Economic Development Committee for Martha Real at large seat
for a term that expires March 23rd, 2029.
Order 1 39, 25 26. Economic Development Committee.
David, oh my gosh, so sorry.
Um, at large for an unexpired term
that expires March 22nd, 2029.
Order 1 40 25 26 South Portland Housing Authority District
one appointing Mary Jo Jocko as a commissioner for a term
that expires March 25th, 2031 Order
1 41 25 26 South Portland Housing Authority District four,
appointing Catherine Lovejoy as a commissioner for a term
that expires March 25th, 2031.
Order 1 42 25 26 Board of Assessment Review District four,
appointing Andrew Snyder for a term
that expires March 15th, 2029.
And lastly, order number 1 43 25 26.
Accepting new cemetery fees
for the city's master fee schedule for parks and recreation.
All items read on the consent calendar
require a majority vote.
Okay, thank you so much.
Now is there anyone who'd like
to make comment on an item on the consent calendar?
I don't see anyone. Thank you.
What is the wish of our counsel? Move for passage.
Move for passage on the consent calendar.
Thank you to Councilor Matthews, a second. Councilor Walker.
Thank you very much. Um,
we don't chat about those items, so now we're having a vote.
All in favor, unanimous passage of our consent calendar.
I would just add that as, as we heard from the clerk,
there are members of our community being appointed
to serve on city committees
and we're very, very grateful to their service.
Um, the committees are important.
Alright, now we're at citizen discussion part one.
You heard the rules.
This is our first public comment period.
For items on
or off our agenda, we do prefer if you're here
to make a comment for an item
that is coming up on the agenda.
You wait until then.
But if there is anyone who would like to make a comment now,
item on and off the agenda
or off, please come to the podium.
Do we have anyone here for that? Ah, we have someone.
Thank you so much. You can state your name.
You can say the street that you live on.
You don't have to give your entire address.
Thank you. My name's Olivia Westfall.
It's nice to meet and see you all.
Um, I live on Hutchinson Street
and I'm here in support of a South Portland
specific eviction moratorium
to support our immigration community, immigrant community.
In 2022, the city of South Portland, along
with other municipalities across Maine,
enacted eviction moratoriums in response
to the public health and economic crises caused by COVID.
Those measures were essential in preventing widespread
housing insecurity and ensuring
that residents could remain safely in their homes.
Today we face a different but equally urgent crisis.
Many members of our immigrant community have been forced
to shelter in place due to ICE presence,
making them particularly vulnerable to eviction.
Without immediate action from the city,
our neighbors could be displaced into unsafe conditions,
exacerbation, exacerbating anxiety, economic instability,
and community disruption.
A temporary eviction moratorium would protect,
protect immigrant families who are already facing fear
and uncertainty, provide time for residents
to access housing assistance and legal resources,
and uphold South Portland's commitment to equity, safety,
and community stability.
We cannot wait on the state to support our people.
Help is needed. Now I urge the council to act swiftly
to adopt this measure, drawing upon the precedent in 2022
to ensure that our city does not displace our immigrant
neighbors who contribute to the
city's vibrancy and resilience.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Do we have another public comment?
Hi, I am Shelby Layton. I live on Stanley Street.
Um, and I'm also here to ask you
to enact an eviction moratorium in response
to the crisis created by ICE in our community.
Um, ICE's presence in our neighborhood has has caused our
neighbors to have to shelter in place.
And it's created a crisis where people are unable still
to go to work and have lost income.
And with it being the first people are unable to pay rent.
Um, it's bad enough that we're, we're seeing ice
abuc our neighbors out of our community.
This is a crisis
and nobody should have to leave their home in South Portland
because they can't afford the rent.
Um, I've seen, uh,
the defense passed around that, uh,
you don't have authority to do this.
And you know, I, as Olivia just mentioned, you
passed an eviction moratorium.
There's an eviction moratorium in the city code right now.
Um, and there's no reason why you can't do that.
Again, this is equally as severe or a crisis.
And this is a moment to stand up
and use the power that you have to do something other
than pass resolutions with platitudes.
You, you, each, every single one of you
is holding an immense amount of power in this moment.
And if there's any time when you should be
using it, it is now.
And so I encourage you to think about what can you do?
Not what, how you can hide behind the law to take no action.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else would like to make public comment at this time?
Yes, we, we have someone in the back,
Uh, Rosemary DeAngelos Pleasantdale.
Uh, there has been a lot going on in our community of late,
and I will speak to that issue when the, um,
when the resolve comes up.
But as chair of the school board, I'd like
to highlight a few changes in, uh,
in our schedule and what's happened.
And I think that's important to get out there.
Um, tomorrow night at six o'clock will a community budget
forum, and
that will be held at South Portland Middle School.
So we had previously, uh, had it scheduled, uh,
at the middle school, then we moved it
to City Hall Chambers,
and then we moved it back to the middle school.
Thank you Jessica, for being so understanding.
Uh, this is intended to be an opportunity for every member
of the public to come to give ideas, to engage in discussion
and offer input.
Every person in the city pays taxes,
whether you are a renter or a homeowner.
You pay property taxes or you pay a rent increase.
And it all eventually goes to the pool of tax
that runs the city, including the school,
which constitutes again, I feel like a broken record.
61% of the final amount, uh,
snacks will be served tomorrow night.
And there will be a second forum
that will be fully virtual on Thursday
night, uh, February 5th.
So tomorrow February 4th, six o'clock February 5th,
Thursday will be fully virtual.
And both of these are posted on the school
department website.
Uh, second, uh,
because of the audit that was here,
I just wanna make this comment that the school department,
um, well first of all,
the school department is conducting a search
for a new superintendent.
And our team from Zeal Education Group will be on site
Monday and Tuesday, February 9th and 10th.
The schedule is also available on the school department
website, and we, again, are looking
for input from all community members.
You know, we're not looking for input from just people
who have kids in school
because it is not just people who have kids in school
who pay that tax bill.
So, um, the, the superintendent's salary is certainly part
of that and who runs our school district.
And, um, what that philosophy is, uh,
affects everybody.
So we are a department of the city.
We are the largest and the most costly department.
So just as you oversee every other department budget,
30 seconds, you also oversee,
even though we have other regulations,
you're not off the hook.
So you must accept responsibility for the school
as a department of the city.
And, um, 80% of our budget are salaries and benefits.
20% is what we can manage.
We're coming up against a very difficult budget year.
And the city's finance director said it's a little murky,
but that's not murky where taxpayers are concerned for them.
They get one tax bill, one bottom line,
and you oversee that property tax increase.
So in preparation for February 10th, I encourage the council
to give us clear guidance
during a very difficult budget year.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Chair DeAngelo.
Is there anyone else who would like to make public comment?
Okay. Um, if there is no one else, public comment is closed.
Our rules for public comment are generally that the, well,
fairly specifically that if there are questions posed,
the city manager will ask them.
While I did not hear direct questions, I do know
that the city manager has some useful information
that he might share with us quickly,
and then we're going to move
to our public hearings and action.
Sure. Thanks Mayor. On the topic of, um,
the eviction moratorium.
So we currently are, um, engaged with MMA,
the main municipal association's legal department, uh,
to find out what our, uh, ability is
to enact such an ordinance.
The last time this was done
as a speaker had pointed out it was when both the state
and the city had declared a state of emergency due to COVID.
Um, and so, um, it's likely that that is what has, uh,
triggered our ability to be able to do that.
But we want to confirm it with MMA
and once we do, um, we'll get back to you
unless Brandon knows the answer off the top of his head,
but we were trying to save, um, legal,
legal time and expense I
Was not expecting. So, um,
I understand I was looking at the old, uh,
moratorium language, which has expired, uh, as of, uh,
a date in 2023.
Uh, and it was associated with COVID,
but beyond that, I don't have any of the background on
the legal justification for it.
Alright, well, thank you to both of you for, um,
I think it is our responsibility
to let the public know what's true, what isn't true
and what we're trying to do.
So thank you very much for that.
And now let's move to public hearings in action, please.
Madame City Clerk, could you read the first ordinance?
We do have a workshop for a Texas instrument.
Do you wanna see? Oh, oops, order.
Sorry, I'm just clarifying. Oh no, nevermind.
Um, I'm so sorry. We are, you're absolutely right.
We're moving to our workshop, Texas Instruments request
for TIFF extension and Mall area, TOD district.
All right, everybody say that three times fast. Thank you.
So, um, so tonight, counsel, you're going to hear from,
uh, both representatives from Texas Instruments
who the current, who the city has had a tax increment
financing, uh, district on a portion of their property for,
uh, 30 years now.
Uh, and their request to have that, uh, extended pursuant
to a new law that allows, uh, TIF districts
that only can last 30 years to be extended for another 20.
But with, um, some more limitations on
what the funds generated in those districts can be spent on.
And also limitations on how much
of a credit enhancement agreement
or tax reimbursement can be
provided back to, um, businesses in those districts.
So first off, you'll hear from, from TI representatives, uh,
and then you'll hear, uh, from city staff to discuss, um,
kind of just a general, I don't want
to call it a TIF one oh one,
but, um, just to make sure that, uh, all counselors
and members of the public have an understandings of, of
what TIFs are and are not.
Um, and to talk, uh, a little bit about the benefits of, uh,
doing an extended tiff
or really to, um, combine the TI TIF
with two other TIF districts, uh, one
of which is expiring soon into a new, um,
larger TIFF district.
Uh, so you'll hear from them after that.
So first off, I'm gonna, uh, kick it over to, uh,
ti we have, uh, Judith Borelli
and Matthew Beck, uh, representing, uh,
Texas Instruments here tonight. So welcome.
Alright, thanks for having me.
Um, you stole a lot of my intro though. I'm Matthew Beck.
I'm the finance controller
of our main fab here in South Portland.
I'm joined by Judith, who's from our
government relations department.
So I'm gonna give a quick, uh, overview of,
of ti as a company.
Judith will talk about some of the partnership we have
with the city, and I think the city staff, uh, will go
through the T 1 0 1 as Scott called it.
Um, so just a reminder, this is, uh, an overview
of our entire company, main fb, uh,
here in South Portland is just a portion of that.
So, uh, this is hot off the press.
We had earnings released last week.
We, in 2025 had a revenue of 17.68.
Are two major segments within our company are analog
and embedded, but you guys probably know us
for our calculators, which falls under the other section.
Um, that's actually a small piece of what we, what we do,
we design and manufacturers the semiconductors.
Um, we operate in key markets, uh,
with a focus on industrial and automotive and markets.
We have 15 manufacturing sites worldwide, one
of which is here in, in Maine.
And we employ about 34,000, uh, employees worldwide.
So we actually have a little show and tell if that's okay.
Um, I'm not sure how familiar everyone is with, uh,
semiconductor wafers or what they even look like. So
Can I bring this forward?
I think so. What is that?
So, um, and you can
go free those up and pass Marine.
These are, um, silicon wafers,
um, contain semiconductors,
and that is what we manufacture.
These are 200 millimeter wa
everybody gets a semiconductor.
Okay. This is an example,
the three millimeter way for, well,
we manufacturing in our factory.
What you have front, some
of the newer factories that all
you get to peek at this one. I love shelter.
Yeah. Here in Maine we manufacture the wafers,
which is what you have in your hand.
Then we send 'em off to our assembly
and test sites, which cut 'em up
and package them into what you guys probably refer
to as computer chips.
Aha. That we have some understanding. Yeah.
So we have all over 80,000, uh, products, uh,
and products, uh, which go to over 100,000 customers.
Uh, that diversity is one of our strategic advantages.
So this is just kind of a highlight of,
of all the things you guys touch every day
that include our products.
You're probably touching something right now that it, uh,
has a Texas instrument semiconductor in it.
I, I'm not gonna read through all of them,
but you kind of get an idea, uh, of, of where our,
our products are going.
So again, yeah, we have, uh,
15 manufacturing sites worldwide.
The, the front end of the process is, what we do here is,
is manufacturer wafers.
The back end is the assembly test,
and we are just one, one of those sites.
We are headquartered in Dallas, Texas.
So, uh, we began the site here in 1997 under the name
of National Semiconductor, uh, national,
it was then acquired by Texas Instruments in 2011.
Um, and so as, as Judith pointed out, we are 200 millimeter,
which is, uh, the size of, of the wafer.
And the, the newer size is the 300 millimeter,
which we have some sites, uh, in, in Texas that,
that manufacture those.
Uh, a big focus of our
site here in Maine is automotive products,
but we also, uh, plan all the end markets
that I talked about earlier.
We have over 90,000 square feet, um,
in our South Portland side of, of clean room capacity.
So I'm gonna hand it over to Ju who's gonna kind of walk
through some of the partnership
that we've had with, with the city.
And then I think, uh, the city staff will talk on, uh,
more on the TIFF itself.
You, Matt. Um, first of all, thank you for allowing us
to come and, and, and give you this presentation and,
and let you know a little bit about what we do
behind those four walls.
If you pass our facility out by the jet port, um,
you can see the big Texas instrument sign,
but not everybody knows what goes on in there.
So, um, this slide I just wanted to cover.
Um, as a company, we are very proud, um, to be,
um, neighbors
and we like to build strong, uh, stronger communities
and we feel we're successful
as a company when our employees, customers, and communities
and shareholders all benefit.
Um, part of my role at Maine Fab is that I'm responsible
for managing our grants and sponsorship budgets
and for working with our nonprofit partners, um,
and education partners.
And we try to make an, an impact in the communities
where we live and work.
Um, we do that in a number of ways.
We provide grants, um, we support a lot
of local organizations
through the United Way of Southern Maine.
Uh, we also have a lot of strong education partnerships,
including supporting STEM education
through power of STEM grants.
Uh, we just recently helped kickstart a new robotics
after school program at the South Portland Middle School
by providing a grant for that.
We partner with, um, Southern Maine Community College
and the University of Maine system
to provide student internships in maintenance, mechanic,
equipment technician, and all engineering disciplines.
And finally, um, we believe
that engaged employees have a stronger sense of belonging.
Um, and we encourage
and support those employees
to volunteer their time at nonprofits
that they're passionate about by providing matching dollars
for their organizations of choice based on, um,
the volunteer hours, um,
the partnership that we've had
with the city has had been mentioned,
has been in place now for 30 years.
Um, and National
Semiconductor made a decision to cite our 200, uh,
200 mil millimeter facility here in Maine, in large part due
to a complete package of incentives that included the TIF
and the credit enhancement arrangement that's been in place.
Um, this has
provided significant financial benefits to the city
and to ti over that timeframe funds,
which the city has used, um, to do a number
of improvement projects, including the Jetport, road sewer,
stormwater projects, and other roadway improvements.
Um, Texas Instruments has continued
to invest substantially in the South Portland facility,
including continued training
and educating of a valuable main workforce.
Um, electronic integrated circuits represent Maine's fifth
largest export category, um, with ti responsible
for significant portion of that.
Additionally, through the partnerships with the universities
and the local community colleges, we've trained thousands
of Mainers for high paying manufacturing careers.
Moving now to the competitive need for us
to maintain the credit enhancement arrangement.
Semiconductor manufacturing is a globally
competitive business.
Governments around the world offer incentives
to encourage semiconductor investment,
and this was true
for main fab at the time we built the factory 30 years ago.
The incentives that we received have helped keep the site
globally competitive in a continually
challenging economic environment.
In order to remain competitive, we need
to maintain the current tax structure, and as such, the TIFF
and specifically the credit enhancement arrangement are,
are still critically important to us.
An extension of our CEA
for another 20 years provides our South Portland factory
with predictability
and certainty in our tax structure that we need to compete
to continue to invest
and maintain these high value, technically skilled jobs.
With that, I'm happy to try
to answer any questions you might have
and then hand over to city staff
to get into more details on the proposal itself.
How do you wanna handle that? Do you wanna do questions
now or do you want to have us um,
You wanna hear from city staff and then ask all questions?
Any, Yeah. Okay.
Hang on for questions,
but staff, if it's gonna present next.
So we have our assistant city manager, Joshua Rennie here,
our economic development director, uh, Leah Duffy,
and, uh, economic development associate Ted Choi here.
Um, uh, Josh will be given the presentation,
but all will be available for questions.
Yeah, look at that. Try not to touch too many things
because sometimes it's fi key.
Thanks for the introduction, Scott.
Good to see you tonight, mayor and counselors.
I'm happy to be, um, presenting this.
Um, as, uh, Scott noted, um, Leah
and Ted are, uh, with me tonight.
I draw Drew the short straw to, to do the presentation.
Um, no, I'm joking.
I, we, uh, we all built this presentation together, um,
but, uh, we thought it'd be more efficient
for just one person to kind of go through all the slides.
I got a, I got a few here, but I'll try to go as quickly as
Possible. Well, we're all in favor of
efficiency. Okay. So thank you,
Josh. Wonderful. So
here's a quick little agenda of what,
uh, I'm gonna be covering.
So we'll do an overview of Tiff, as Scott had mentioned, um,
in the opening remarks, uh, we, we understand that a lot
of you are very proficient with Tiff,
but there may be some members of the audience
or the public who are not.
And, uh, it's always good to have a refresher.
So we're gonna talk first few slides
about, uh, how Tiffs work.
Uh, we got a list of all the active t tiffs in,
uh, districts in the city.
Um, talk about the new law that recently was passed
by the legislature that allows for the proposed extension.
And then we'll get right into the proposal of, you know,
what is it that, um, um, city staff, um,
are proposing along with Texas instruments,
obviously they have, or a standing
request that has come to the city.
But, um, beyond their requests, there are some modifications
and amendments to the district that, um, if we were to,
to do this, that staff would, would, would recommend.
So, what is a, a development district?
So in, uh, title 30, a main statute,
specifically chapter 2 0 6, um, that's the statute
that governs development districts are more specifically tax
increment financing districts.
And there's really two types.
The, I call one
of them the more traditional economic
development type district.
And then there's also affordable housing districts.
But for all intents
and purposes, they, they function very, very similarly.
Um, t's one of the most impactful tools
that municipalities have
to leverage investment in public infrastructure, um,
and also to, uh, attract development, um, through,
um, tax incentives.
Um, and, um, in order to establish a district,
a designated geographical area does need to be set.
Um, so there are boun, all
of the districts have very specific boundaries,
geographic boundaries,
and that's important, um, as we'll get into in a second.
So, um, how are TIF revenues created?
So the first step, when a district is established, um,
there is the then current assessed value
of the underlying property, right?
And so at the time the district is established, the value
of the property is set,
and we refer to that as the original assessed value
of the parcel or the, or a grouping of parcels.
And the taxes that are paid on that original assessed value,
they continue to go on the general fund.
So that effectively sets the baseline.
Um, so step two is the incremental value.
So that's, you know, uh, project X happens, um,
$10 million in new value gets created
because of the project.
That's the incremental or the new value.
And that is what is captured, um, by the, the TIFF district.
Um, and that's called, referred to
as the captured assess value.
And so the taxes that are paid on the captured assess value,
those are the TIFF revenues.
Um, so in summary, uh, revenues are only created as a result
of an increase in assessed value.
How are the TIFF fund funds used?
There are broadly three categories.
So of the monies that are retained by the city, um,
most often there's a sort of pay as you go model
where each year as taxes are paid,
the city retains those TIF dollars
and they become essentially available within that TIF fund
to spend on a whole range of municipal projects.
And within the development program of each district,
there's a table of, of eligible project costs
that are approved by the legislative body.
So when a district is created, it goes to the city council,
you all vote to approve it
and say, these are the list of of uses that we desired for,
is how the money is gonna be spent.
And then, um, as those, those dollars come in, uh,
it takes some planning and some strategy about
how those monies are allocated.
Oftentimes there's more need than dollars available.
And so there, there, there needs
to be some thought put into, um, anyway,
how the, how the money's gonna be allocated.
I'll just add, Josh, just to add clarity,
those TIF dollars are more restricted than just general,
like the OAV dollars.
You can spend them on anything allowed by law.
Anything that goes into the tiff, um, there, there's,
you know, maybe 80% of those things
that you could spend it on. So
Yeah, that's a good, that's a good point, Scott.
Yep. So, uh, going back to the statute chapter 2 0 6, um,
I'm not gonna go through that, but it, it's very specific as
to how the monies can be spent.
There. There are a range of broad, broad range of uses,
but, um, but as Scott had said, um, you know, it's not just,
um, it can't, the money can't just be spent on, on,
on any general government purpose.
Um, so the second category is municipal bonds.
Um, sometimes there, it, there it may be the case
that money needs to be spent, um, upfront say that,
you know, just as a an example,
say there's a municipal business park
and you need to bring a new roadway in
and sewer infrastructure and whatnot to start developing
that, that municipal business park, it may be
that debt needs to be incurred up front
to build some of that infrastructure.
And then as the lots are developed,
the money is used from the TIFF to repay,
or excuse me, to pay the debt service.
And so that is all another model that exists.
And then the third category is a credit enhancement
agreement, which is what, um, our partners at TI had alluded
to in their portion of the presentation, which is, um,
what we call the tax incentive piece.
But effectively, the developers investing in facilities
and infrastructure, not only, um, on their own parcel,
but uh, occasionally they're even making an investment
within the public right away
and other public infrastructure that we would want them
to incur the cost upfront,
and then we would re reimburse them over time for
that upfront cost.
And oftentimes, um, that's, this is linked,
this incentive is linked
to are they creating new taxable value for the community?
Are they creating or retaining jobs?
Um, are they creating re affordable housing?
You know, there's some, there's some, uh,
community benefit that's being realized.
Um, so here's just a, a graphic of how this works.
And so, um, you know
what the light blue on the bottom is showing is this is the,
the parcel and how much property taxes, in this case,
$4,000 a year, this is what they were paying prior
to the district being established.
So then the district is established,
there's a significant investment that's made,
and, um, now they're, they're paying $40,000 a year.
So of the $40,000 in total, 4,000 is the
original money that keeps flowing into the general fund.
$36,000 is the TIFF money.
Those are the TIFF revenues that are being created.
And then in the green line shows the, the different uses of
how the monies, um, could be used.
And then, as Scott had mentioned actually just a moment ago,
uh, that blue line that the, the line that's going, uh,
vertically downward, the three A, um,
there are occasionally, um, expenses that are, that are
otherwise being paid for from the general fund
that are eligible to be used for, um,
TIF monies are eligible used to, to, um, to, to spend on.
So just an example of that, uh, broadly to pay
for economic development for the community.
And so a substantial amount
of the economic development department's budget is paid for
by TIF each year.
And arguably that's a cost that would ha have
to be paid either way.
It's just in, in, in this instance,
because we can use the money for that purpose.
We, we do. So, um, and that helps with the, the tax rate.
Um, as I had mentioned, the credit enhancement agreements is
the tax incentive component.
Um, the tax incentive is a portion of the, uh, taxes
that are paid back to the business
or the developer from future TIFF revenues.
Um, as, um, TI had mentioned, we have a longstanding ca
with Texas Instruments,
and then additionally with a lot of our affordable housing
districts, um, we have, I think with all of them,
we have CS as well.
And that's just the nature of those developments.
Um, they essentially require, um, a CEA
to make the, the project work.
Um, we have had CS with other, um, entities as well,
but those have kind of phased out in, in time.
Um, so the, the next slide here is, um,
talking about the tax shift benefit.
So, you know, what, what makes this
valuable to the community?
And so the most substantial,
or one of the most substantial ways that this is of value
to the community is that
it effects effectively lets a community shelter new value
from our, um, equalized state valuation.
And so there are three categories here that are listed
of why this is, uh, helpful.
Um, so when new value is created, um,
that commun in a community, that community relative
to others may become a bit more affluent,
or they have, you know, new value, more,
more value than others in relative terms.
And so, um,
that could have a negative impact on the state education
subsidy, um, where the state, um, funding formula looks at,
uh, a whole host of variables.
But, um, one of those is
what is each municipality's total valuation
and what, what can it contribute to the cost of education?
And so by sheltering some of the,
the value in the community, um,
it makes the need relatively more in that community.
And so it is a little boost in education subsidy.
Likewise, um,
with municipal revenue sharing, it's, it, it's similar.
There's a complicated formula,
but it goes back to, um, the pri the primary variable is
what is this, um, municipality's valuation.
And so a lower valuation, you get more revenue share.
And then county tax, it happens a little bit in reverse,
where if you are, um, uh,
have you a relatively higher municipal valuation relatively
to your peers in the same county,
then your county tax obligation is
higher relative, relative to others.
And so by sheltering value, you can lower your county tax,
um, contribution.
And so, um, this is just an example, so don't read
to deeply into this 49%, 51%,
but it's just to give you a sense that for, um,
every new dollar of value that's created
and on which taxes are being paid in the community, um,
in most communities, about half of that dollar is being lost
to these cost shifts.
And so the, the, the tax shift benefit
to sheltering value is substantial.
Um, here's the list of the active, um,
TIF districts in the community.
Um, uh, we've separated 'em to two columns,
the economic development tips
and the affordable housing tips.
Um, the three that are highlighted red are the districts
that are subject of tonight's conversation.
And so obviously the primary one is Texas Instruments.
They have an interest in, um,
or have made a formal request to extend the District,
city staff have reviewed that request
and, uh, believe
that there's a compelling reason why we would want to expand
that the district.
Um, however, um,
and I'll get into it here in just, uh,
maybe it's on the next slide.
Um, sorry, let, let me pause that thought
because I think I have another slide that I want to, I want
to get more into detail on that one.
So what makes this possible an additional, uh,
20 year extension of the tiff, um,
main law in 2023 has been amended.
It was LD 1739, the main legislature in trying
to induce more, um, development of affordable housing
and mixed use development, uh, transit oriented development,
um, is, um, created in statute
a 10 year window.
Um, so it was from, upon enactment of the law
for a period of 10 years.
Districts that are gonna be expiring in that time, um,
can apply to amend the district
for a subsequent 20 year extension.
So that effectively makes the district up
to 50 years in, in length.
Um, and the caveat is that 75%
of the TIF revenues need to be used to support, uh,
transit oriented development and or affordable housing.
Um, so the law does allow, still allows a broad use
of TIF funds for infrastructure planning costs, um,
that support this type of development.
And, um, in a subsequent slide, we'll get into, um,
how we believe the, the city could benefit, um,
in using these monies for a variety of, um, local projects.
Um, so tis request for the TIFF extension as, uh,
previously stated, um,
they have an interest in seeing the
district extended for 20 years.
Um, but because of what I had said on the previous slide
that the majority of the money for this type
of extension needs to be used for those those limited uses,
what it means is that only 25%
of what's captured can be used
for the credit enhancement agreement.
And so what that effectively means is that only 25% of the,
of the, uh, financial benefit
that the company had been realizing, um, will
be realized in the future if you're supportive
of, of extending it.
Um, right now we only capture 50%
of the new taxable value.
And so this is getting a little bit wonky,
but um, I had showed you the slide earlier of, um, all
of the new value that gets created.
Uh, that's the TIF revenues,
and that's true, except you don't have to capture it all.
You can capture something less than that.
And in this particular instance, in this district,
we only capture 50% of the new taxable value.
When I say new I'm, it's 30 years old,
but I think you get the point.
Um, and so 20, it'd be 25% of the 50%.
So I just want you folks to realize that the, the,
if the CEA has extended
the maximum amount the company would get in a tax incentive
is 12.5% of
what they're paying in property taxes on an annual basis.
Um, so the reason that we would want
to align these three districts into one is
because right now the geographic boundaries of the TI
TIFF are limited to their property,
not even all their property, but
a portion of their property.
I have a map that I'll show you in just a, a moment,
and they're generating a significant amount of, um,
of TIF revenue on an annual basis.
And we would want, um, if the city had a, um,
if the city wanted to use that money,
'cause again, we'd be retaining the vast majority of it,
we would want to have a large geographic area where there,
where that money could be used.
And so it makes sense to transition the district from
what is a very, um, limited geographic area
to a much broader geographic area
that encompasses transit roots throughout the city
and hits a bunch of, uh, a variety of development parcels
where there's opportunity for growth
and redevelopment in the future.
We have two TIFF districts that already sort of do that.
And so one is obviously the transit tiff.
We already have a transit tiff,
and so the proposal essentially is to combine the two.
But then there's also the growth area, tiff,
and again, I, I have maps in the subsequent slides.
I'll show you what, what these are.
Um, and that one's gonna be expiring next year anyway.
Um, we've never captured any of the value from it.
It really was, um, it wasn't a bad idea.
It just, uh, it didn't pan out the way
that it was envisioned to work back in 2015.
And so, um, there are a handful of, of parcels within
that district that I think would, uh, it would work well to,
to bring them into, into this new district.
Um, this is a big map, but I'm gonna zoom in on these areas.
So this is the current growth area tiff,
and there are six areas named throughout the city.
So you can kind of generally see that it's distributed
and then here are, um, each of them.
And so there are a bunch of parcels over on Darling Ave, um,
off of, um, off of, um, Western Avenue.
Um, I, I made a mistake here.
I'm just noticing I Darling ave listed twice,
but that's not, that's not accurate.
So, um, what the second one, the one in the middle
that says Darling Ave, that's actually a lower
Main Street route one.
And so, um, that's down by, um, the, um,
the beer distributor.
You can see off on the right hand side.
Um, the distributors on that one, so I apologize about that.
Second Darling app should say lower Main Street.
And then the purple one is Main and Westbrook.
So that's off the interchange
and that comprises several of the hotels.
Um, the one on the lower left is cash corner
to goes up sort of north on, uh, main Street,
route one towards Legia.
Um, there's also, in the middle bottom is Chambers Ave.
And so that's sort of off the backside of Caco Bay Steel,
um, down in that business park area.
And then Madison Street, um, up off of Breakwater, um,
near the, the shipyard area.
So those are the four, um, back in, again,
back in 20 14, 20 15.
Staff at the time thought that there was some
development opportunity in each of those locations.
And so all of these locations were put into this,
this ti TIF district.
This next map is the current transit, um, district.
Sorry. Yeah. May
I ask Josh, can you just go back to slides to the map
before the Yeah. Okay.
Yeah. So this is the blown out, kind
of blown out you can see.
Okay. Thank you. I just wanted
To, yeah, absolutely.
Um, this is a very busy graphic. Okay.
So I'll just kind of, um, uh, kind of point you to some
of the more, uh, notable aspects of this.
So the blue that goes throughout the city
and sort of has the yellow lines through it,
that was the bus route in 2010.
And it's even been modified since then.
But in 2010 when this district was created,
that was the South Portland bus route,
and it did not encompass any of the metro routes
or other bus routes that came through South Portland.
Um, there is, um, the transit hub is located in Mill Creek,
but you see the Mill Creek peninsula is shaded
and knight is shaded like this light purple.
And that's because, um,
there's already a TIF district there,
that's our downtown district,
and there are some other shaded areas through this map.
So you, one thing about TIF that you just everyone needs
to understand is that you cannot overlay a district on
top of a district.
They need to be, they can be adjacent,
but they need to be separate.
And so this ba this transit district connects, um,
parcels throughout the community and, and,
and identifies the transit
corridors throughout the community,
but it doesn't overlap with any of the other districts.
And so that's why there's a lot of color coding here.
Um, it does name the, um, the bus stop at the mall
and it calls out that there could be a future transit center
there, which is something that we'd want to carry over
the parcels that you see in red on this map.
We would not carry all of them over,
but there are a handful that we believe are worth carrying
over into the new district.
And so the large one on the west end
of the city is the 50 Western Ave
National Guard stations that's on there.
Um, there's also, um, some parcels
that are adjacent to cash corner.
There's a parcel down and,
and it's really hard to see, I apologize,
but on southern south part of, part of Main Street rule one
that we want to keep in the district.
But there, um, most of the other parcels in red,
particularly on the eastern side of the city,
there probably is not, um, a valid case to be made
to retain those.
You see, there's a large red area within the
Liberty Shipyard area.
Uh, we wouldn't, uh, propose continuing that.
There's also the, um, the O'Neill Street parcels in there
as well as Summit Terrace,
and there's likely no need
to keep those parcels in the, in the district as well.
But anyway, uh, the reason this is important is that we're,
is when we, in the, the two slides from now,
when I show you conceptually what we're proposing
for a new district map, we are gonna try
to preserve the most of these transit corridors,
and we're naming new transit corridors to capture
what Metro is currently doing today.
And, um, acknowledging that in the future there may be, um,
proposals to optimize bus service and serve, uh, new areas.
And so we wanna be flexible to that.
And then this map is the Texas entrance DIS district.
And this, you can see this is very limited to just a portion
of their, of their property.
Um, again, apologize for this.
Uh, it is really hard to see, I think, for the audience,
but the, um, the big blue patches are boxes
and they, it allows you to kind of zoom in on some
of the areas, um, in those, uh, transit corridors.
The red rings are, um, key transit, uh, facilities.
Um, so that could be as something as simple as a bus stop,
but there may be areas where we'd want,
not necessarily a transit hub,
but maybe a, a bigger bus stop
or it'd be a higher, higher utilized, um, transit stop.
And then certainly there are, um,
there's the current transit hub in Nightvale Mill Creek.
And then, um, in the future there would be a,
ideally there would be a,
a larger transit center in the mall area, uh, where several,
um, bus routes converge, um, and connections can be made.
This is, that was a draft by the way too,
if I hadn't said that earlier.
Um, and we, we'd be happy to get counsel recommendations
and comment, um, on if there are other areas that you'd like
to see part of the district.
So the, the next two slides, we wanted to show you the, the,
the money, the finances of what does it look like
with an extension of the district
and what does it look like without an
extension of the district.
And these tables are specific only
to today's TI district not the others.
And the reason is, is because this is
where the vast majority of the captured value is.
The others, it's, it's very modest.
I'll show you in a moment. Um, so the columns here,
you can see from left to right FY 24, all the way to FY 29.
So the first, um, the three columns are, are known numbers.
And then FY 27 through 29,
those are just projections on the rows.
You can see that the, the capture rate is 50%.
As I noted earlier, the total TIF revenues have been
hovering around $1.2 million per year.
So it's substantial.
The TIF revenues distributed to TI as part
of the credit enhancement agreement.
That's a fluctuating number. It's dynamic.
And the reason is because the way
that the credit enhancement agreement is written today is
that it, it's intended to, to incentivize
continued investment in, um, tools
and equipment, business equipment.
Um, and the city realizes a tremendous amount of value
in Betty business equipment tax exemption, um,
from the state of Maine for business equipment
that is valued
and it's, it's value is assessed, um, at the plant.
They submit annually an application for a tax exemption.
And then the state of Maine reimburses the city
of South Portland as well
as all the other municipalities in the state
who have businesses that have the, the Betty, uh, benefit.
And so the Betty receipts total about $1.1 million.
And that's outside of what their,
the company is actually paying in property
taxes each year, the city.
So it's, it's big money.
And, um, and,
and we have an, the city
of South Portland has an interest in trying to incentivize
as best we can their continued investment in the plant
because this type of equipment, it's very expensive,
it's depreciates quickly
and continued investment keeps the, the values up
and keeps the, the Betty, um, flowing to, uh, the city.
And um, so, uh, what you'll see in that,
that's the third row down TIFF revenues distributed to ti.
So in FY 24, the company got $0.
There was no tax incentive that was given to them.
And that was because over the previous three years,
there's a a, an average that's done there.
They did not hit the, the benchmark to,
to trigger the, the incentive.
Um, it looks like an FY 25,
there was a partial incentive paid, um,
it was right just under $800,000.
But then in FY 26,
because of the level of in invest investment, um,
they got the full, um, tip TIF revenue, um, paid
to them just over $1.2 million.
Um, and again, it is not all of the taxes that are paid.
Again, we're only capturing 50%
of taxes in the, in the district.
So they effectively got 50% tax
reimbursement that particular year.
So, um, so then the next,
I just, are we coming close to the end?
Uh, this is a long presentation.
I think it's that I can breeze through it,
but I I think that we'd, I'd be remiss to, um,
to gloss over any of this.
Alright, well I'm
More confused now than I was this morning.
Well, we're with you. Alright.
I just want people to still have brain, brain function.
I apologize. This is a very dense and complicated thing
and if there's more discussion that's gonna be needed
with council, we're happy to make time for it.
It's just, uh, yeah, it's, it's consequential.
So I think it's worth spending a little bit of of time on
and we're, again, we're happy to
answer all any questions that you have
After. Alright, thank you very,
no, we appreciate it.
Um, so the tip revenues, uh, distributed ti
and then conversely the TIF revenues retained by the city.
And so, um, that, that adds up obviously to the total,
uh, tip revenues.
Um, the second
to last row across is the general fund tax revenue.
And, um, and what that calculation, it's important
to note is that that includes, um,
just under a 58% tax shift.
So I was saying in a previous slide about the
tax shift benefit.
And so that number is discounted
to account for that tax shift.
But what the last row on the bottom we wanted
to give you a sense of.
So all the money that the city's bringing in, in TIFF
and all the money that it's bringing in in the general fund,
what does that add up to?
And so in FY 27, um, it would add up to, um,
just under $1.4 million
and that assumes
that the company would get a 25% tax incentive,
um, and
that the city would retain 75% of TIF revenues.
So the next slide shows
what the no extension scenario looks like.
And as you can see, I'm gonna go right
to the yellow highlighted box on the, the bottom
is $982,000 is what it would add up to.
And that would be general fund only.
And the reason for that is
because we would be losing a substantial amount
of money in the tax shift benefit.
And, um, so, um, I just want to point out
with these two slides that the company, uh,
at a 25% incentive rate, it'd be somewhere in the ballpark
of $300,000 a year.
And by extending the district,
the the city would realize a net benefit
of an additional $400,000
eligible uses of funds in the proposed tif.
It may, we are getting close now. I see this slide.
I know I'm getting very close to the end here.
Yeah, take us home. I apologize. This is lengthy.
So, um, this is a bit of a reiteration of
what we had included in the council's memo in the packet,
but there, um, are five categories here that are listed.
Um, so even though with the 20 year extension, uh,
we're gonna be somewhat limited in as to
how we can use these monies either for transit
or development and
or affordable housing, um, we have gone through a,
a list of all of the anticipated costs, variety
of infrastructure improvements
and things that are gonna be needed within the city
over the next 20 years.
And city staff believe that the need for the money is going
to exceed the monies available
that are gonna be generated by this tiff.
And so I, we don't believe
that there's gonna be a problem finding
ways to spend this money.
And, and I'm not saying that this is gonna be new money
that we otherwise wouldn't be spending.
What I'm saying is that this is,
these are likely expenditures
that are gonna be incurred in the next 20 years,
whether we have a TIF or not.
Um, I'm going to jump to the second column, infrastructure
to development, 'cause that's really the big one.
But, um, a range of improvements across the city
and within the district
and adjacent to the, to the district
as the boundaries are set.
Roadways, intersections, bike, P traffic lights, signals,
paving sewer and storm water transit hubs
and bus stops, land acquisition, et cetera.
And then the final column on the right financing costs
to the extent that the city council would want to use some
of these monies to assist with debt service
for the Pearl Street pump station, we've checked with DCD
and Augusta and they believe that to the extent
that improvement, um, is needed to preserve
and expand sewer capacity in the western end of the city,
that a prorated share of that cost could be born, uh,
by this TIF district.
And so that would be another very good use of the monies
that, uh, it wouldn't take long to eat up quite a bit of it.
So in addition to that, uh, transit, if we wanted
to do transit expansion in the future, affordable housing,
if the city council wanted
to allocate money towards affordable
housing projects in the future.
And then on the far left column, professional services,
which covers planning engineering for a variety
of city projects, um, that, um,
would be needed likely in in the future.
Um, on the bottom, there's an asterisk comment.
Um, I know Councilor West is gonna ask this question
and it's a, it's a bit of a question mark that we still need
to do a little bit more engagement with, um,
with DECD and Augusta.
But, um, how can the monies, if at all, be spent on certain,
uh, public facilities?
We know for certain that, um, up to the 30 year mark, so
that would be June of this year.
Any monies that we currently have in the balance right now
that absolutely can be used for construction of, uh,
public facilities to include public safety, new city hall,
et cetera, uh, we would have to again, amend this, um,
district to allow for that.
Uh, but there's a question mark about
what specifically we could use the money for
for the next 20 years, um, for those purposes.
I made it, and I'm sorry that it went again, that it went so
Long. I I
know it's really dense.
Well, the purpose, I'll just remind the public
that the purpose of a workshop is to gather information
and the council's role tonight is to provide guidance
about the direction that staff, um, is bringing to us
and does the reduced incentive structure
for Texas Instruments strike the balance
that the public needs to see between economic partnership
and benefits to them of us
who are living in South Portland. So, um,
Quick recap on the three things
we're looking for guidance on
If you would like to do that. Thank you.
Sure. Are you, is council desire
to extend the TITF for the 20 years?
If so, are you in agreement with staff's proposal
to incorporate those two other TIF districts
and make it, uh, a larger, uh, TIF district?
And then third, uh, do you support, uh, pursuing a 25% CEA
for, uh, which is effectively 12.5%,
but uh, for, uh, Texas instrument?
So those are the three questions we're looking
for guidance on tonight.
Thank you very much. Alright, counselors,
I imagine there may be some questions, counselor.
Scott, can you, um, there
Were no slide numbers just to comment,
but there was a graph earlier on that had OAV
and DAV and I wanted to ask
what the acronyms were to start
This. Is this, this one
here?
So the, um, the original assessed value
is, um, okay.
Yes. So prior to establishment of the district, so today,
let's say that there's an area of the city
and there's no district that exists today.
It has an assessed value
and we, we would never, um, so when the, when the boundaries
of the district are set, that OAV kind of gets locked in
and the monies that are being collected annually in tax
revenues for that, that today's value that continues
to flow into the general fund.
And so there's no, yeah, it doesn't penalize the city
for creating the district.
So really the cav is what's being captured,
the captured, assessed value.
That's only the new value
that's being created into the future. Yeah.
Okay. That, that's very helpful. Yeah.
Um, my next question was, sorry,
can I just keep going or Oh, yeah,
Yeah. Ask your second
question, then let's move
and give some other folks a
Chance. Just one more.
Well, at this point, yes. Two,
Can you describe the difference between the extension
of this current TIFF and the expansion of the districts
and what exactly that means in terms of all of this?
Right. I I've been using several words kind
of interchangeably,
but just to clarify, the, the actual act
that would be happening is that we would be amending
the Texas Instruments TIF district.
Yes, that's the one that stays,
but we recognize that it meet, if it were to be preserved,
it needs to be substantially amended to expand.
And you can do this, you can add new geographic areas
to the district.
And in doing so, we would want to, um, sunset
the other two districts
because a lot of those areas, particularly transit, we want
to use the same transit corridors and, and, and,
and name all of those areas.
And there's also some development parcels that would be good
to, to, to group into this, this district.
So the, there'd be two districts
that would prematurely expire.
We would sunset those
and then we would take the transit corridors
and some key development parcels
and we would expand the geography of the TI district
and we would restyle it.
We would rename it.
Um, and it, I don't know what, what we want to call it,
but you know, I don't see any problem
with just calling it the
Transit Oriented Development District.
Um, um,
yeah, so, right, it's an amendment.
It's an amendment to extend the term
and modify the, um, bonds essentially
Because all the revenue
that's being generated now in the TI area that's, you know,
basically has to be almost limited to that one area.
Now it's all across the city.
So there's more areas where that,
those dollars can be spent.
Okay. Um, councilor Walker, just
To make sure that I understand, um, the answer
that you just gave to Councilor Scott.
So in order, because earlier you said
that two dis two tip districts cannot, um,
overlay on top of one another.
We do have to sunset those other two districts in order
to create the new one.
Yes, ma'am. To, to the, to the extent that you,
you would want to use the same geographic area.
They, they can't both exist overlaid one on top of another.
And um, and like I said, you know, with the growth area tif,
some of those parcels
of staff are not recommending retaining within the tif,
but there are some that we do still feel, um, would be, um,
of value, particularly the parcels are in
and around cash corner, lower Main Street, et cetera.
Um, and then likewise, same with the transit, um, TIFF,
we wouldn't include some parcels,
but there's some that we de we believe
that should absolutely be, be kept in there.
Okay. Thank you. Councilor Matthews,
Did I hear you say that you wanted
to throw the National Guard property into that TIF area?
We it's already within the TIF district. Yeah,
But I know, but why,
why would we even have it in there? And they
Develop, you've always
Said, well, we don't even have access to that.
I never will.
Yeah. It's interesting that they added that.
I believe it's in the transit tip, so
that would've been back in 2010, they would've added that.
So it's already, it's already within the district.
Um, if the council wants to, we could strike it.
It's, it's your, your prerogative of which parcels go in
and which which ones go out.
Um, but certainly at this point, you know, um, knowing
what we know now, regardless of what happens with it,
there's likely gonna be development potential
sometime likely in the 2030s.
And so there may, there may be a reason to keep it in there.
Alright. Other counselors with questions.
Councilor West. Thank you.
Uh, a co just a couple of questions for ti directly.
Did you have a chance to tell us
how many employees you have at your site?
We, um, we typically do not discuss,
um, site specific headcount in a public forum.
Um, but I can say
that we have maintained several hundred full-time employees
at the South Portland facility for a number of years.
You could kind of bracket it.
Do you have, in the context of the next 20 years, are there
anticipated, um, improvements that are gonna be somehow
referenced in the new credit enhancement agreement?
Uh, again, um, those are things, uh, there are details
around, um, future investments that we'd be happy
to get into in a separate discussion,
but I'm not at liberty
to talk about them specifically in a, in a public forum.
But if, um, we'd be more than happy to
go into executive session with the council
to talk about any specifics around that.
And then now I shift back to the,
how long can I go? I have quite a few
Questions. Um, well hang
on.
'cause we were doing two
to start and I just wanna make sure.
Councilor Pride, do you have a question at this time?
Do not. Councilor Coleman.
Alright, Natalie, I mean, counselor West,
please ask another question
and then I have this feeling counselor
Scott has more questions.
If, uh, I think
a concern is with this sort of agreement,
what happens in the next 20 years if the organization
relocates shuts down a plant, leaves town?
And so are there any protections in the credit revised
credit enhancement agreement that would provide
for some kind of in loop payment if they do shut down prior
to the 20 year expiration of the CEA
Council? Are you suggesting,
um,
like a reimbursement back to the city?
You mentioned that we, we anticipate about $400,000 a year
on these that we wouldn't otherwise receive, for example.
Right. If you just through
The tax shift benefit.
Right. So
I'm, I'm just concerned about the city being financially
protected if we're gonna move into some kind
of an extended agreement like this.
Yeah, we haven't got to that point, um, yet
to renegotiate the CEA, the, the, this workshop really is
to, um, consult with all of you and get guidance as whether
or not this is something you could support.
If we leave tonight
and you're generally supportive of moving forward with this,
then we would begin some conversations about what
that CEA might look like.
Um, I, I do have some ideas where we might not want to yet,
um, sign a 20 year CEA,
but structure it as something that could be 20 years, maybe
with five year check-ins or something like that.
Um, there, there's ways that we could do
to, we could do that.
And what if we don't change the boundaries
of the Texas instrument TIFF District.
Now they, we did use the TIF ones funds from this district
as it exists to build a road that's entirely
outside the district. Isn't that correct?
Correct. Yeah. So one of the things that we didn't want
to get into the presentation was so long already, um,
but there's so much we didn't talk about.
Uh, so within the, within the statute, within the statute,
there are sort of three tiers of how the monies can be used.
It's within the district outside,
but uh, directly related to the district.
And, uh, the third tier is just citywide
outside the district and unrelated to the district.
And so the third category would be like economic
development, marketing for the community, you know,
things like that that aren't necessarily related,
specific to the, to the district.
Um, so the, um,
development infrastructure cost category
that does allow both tier one and tier two investments.
And so it, it wouldn't need to be inside the district,
it just could be immediate,
just directly related to the district.
And I suspect that's how Jeff, Jeff Port Road was paid for.
So we could leave the boundaries of the TI
TIF district exactly as they are.
And we could still spend money
outside the district. Isn't that correct?
No, it's because I think it would be very difficult for us
to make a straight face case
that this is A-A-T-O-D district.
If it, the, the boundaries were left as is today.
Um, I think it would be, it would be very, very limiting as
to how we could use, um, how we could use the money.
So, um, your what,
when I look at the revenue
that you anticipate coming from this district, it's a,
we agree that it's approximately $400,000 more than we would
get if we just eliminated the district
Appro approximately. Correct. Yeah.
So over the 20 years of the district, that's,
that costs out to about 8 million if we stay on the
same standard. Yep.
That does assume that there's no increase in assessed
value of any of the other parcels
that we would add to the district. And, uh,
I'm only talking about the TI district.
Yeah. Okay. I'm talking solely about
Ti solely. Okay, gotcha.
I'm following you.
Right. And,
and yet you have a list of sort of a wishlist
where even the studies of the, just the plain studies
of the things you say are over, um,
over $900,000.
And then each of the elements that you've listed, the sort
of wishlist is to be determined.
So it's not a really unrealistic list of
what you could generate from Yeah. 20
Years. That's, uh, I'll be
just very candid.
Uh, that's how every TIF district is written,
that our laundry list of, um, our wishlist,
if you wanna call it that, is millions
and millions and millions of dollars.
And the reality is that there's gonna be much less
money actually generated.
And so you need to be judicious about how the money's used.
And, um, but what that does though is it, it builds in,
um, flexibility.
The growth area TIFF only started in 2015
and it's expiring in 2027. Yeah,
12 years. Why
did we have a 12 year tiff on the growth area?
Yeah, I wasn't here at the time, counselor,
but, um, the way it was described to me when I started was
that it was, the intent was to, um,
quickly induce investment in some key
development areas by, um, essentially saying
to developers, this is a short term TIFF district,
and if you come in in the next few years and you do X, Y,
and Z and you increase the value
where you're essentially guaranteed to get, um, you know, a,
a credit enhancement agreement, a tax incentive.
So it was kind of built into the district that that was,
it was, you know, if if we build it, they will come
and, uh, things didn't pan out, um, that way.
And, uh, it's not a knock on the
people who had envisioned it.
It was a good idea. It just, uh,
I think in practice oftentimes, um, you know, you
every parcel has unique needs.
So that from that council
Counselor West, I'm just wondering
how much more you are thinking
to ask now. 'cause we have Counselor
Scott.
No, counselor Scott? No, I think, I think I,
I I yield my time to the council.
Ah, we're yielding time, are we? Yes. Okay.
The growth area TIFF has not generated any
tax increment, is that correct?
We, we, the, i the way that it's written is that the,
the city, um, can elect not to capture any value
and there really isn't, it's not worth doing it
unless there was a development that occurred
that was requesting a tax incentive.
My understanding is that we, we've never captured
anything from it. Yeah.
So given that, why would we consider redoing
or extending this growth area, TIFF,
that may be a rhetorical question that we'll answer later.
Okay. On the transitive, that expires in 2039,
so that's far away from it expiring at this time.
Right. This would, this would actually reset it so
that it would be from, uh, 2026 to 2046.
So we'd add another seven years to it.
In terms of the, i, in terms of the transit tiff,
it would be useful to know what uses can be made
of the transit, TIFF revenues,
and if those revenues can be used for city buildings
That particularly district isn't,
is generating $30,000 a year.
Um, So I I,
I appreciate your question,
but I guess my, um, sort of off the cuff response is
that it, it's, I mean,
unless something significantly changes, it's not going
to be of much value.
What really, to be very blunt, I mean, what what makes
this so valuable is we have an OAV original assessed value
on the Texas instrument site from 30 years ago prior
to the substantial investment that was made that is so low.
And the, the, the new new value is
so much higher than it was back then.
It's, it's kicking off $1.2 million a year in TIF revenues.
And that is firepower.
These other districts don't have any incremental value.
I mean, it's, they do, but it's modest, you know, so it's,
um, it wouldn't,
it wouldn't provide much value in that regard.
We could take the, given that the statute wants you
to spend the money on affordable housing
or transit oriented development,
can't we take the boundaries
of the existing TI Tiff district
and extend them to the areas around the mall
where we're really interested in transit oriented
development and the, the kinds of things
that you mentioned in the staff report?
Yes, counselor. Yeah, absolutely.
And we, so, you know, a few months ago
as we were brainstorming
and thinking about this, we're thinking, okay, well
what if we have two transit districts?
We have like the greater main mall area
that com comprises ti
and everything, say everything west of the highway,
and then we amend the other transit district
and say, oh, that's gonna be everything sort of east
of, of the highway.
Uh, but the more we got talking about it, we thought, well,
but why would you do that?
You know, it, it, you know, it, it just, you're limiting,
you're limiting yourself as a community in, in
how you could spend the money if you
just lump everything together.
It would just provide a lot more flexibility in the future
to the city council to decide how they wanna, um,
how they want to, um, strategically allocate those
resources throughout the city.
And what does the black hatching mat, um,
mean on the transit tiff map?
Let me pull that up real quick. Yeah.
Those are conceptually, those are the parcels that we would,
um, we're thinking about including.
And so, and I apologize, it's hard to see,
but you know, so near the mall, there's some parking lots
There. Were really, the only
one I'm concerned about is the western
AF parcel that a lot of a number
of people in the community would like to see acquired
for public use by the city.
And I'm surprised to see that on this map
and as part of the transit district, given the conversations
that we've had about that parcel.
Yeah, I, um,
I thought you were gonna be excited about
that one actually tonight when I came in here.
That I would've bet that way too. Yeah.
Um, because, because I think I'm pretty confident
that we're gonna be able to write into the district
that we could do targeted property acquisition.
And so, um, to the extent
that the city is ever interested in the future,
whether it's 10 years from now,
whenever that site is vacated,
there may be some resources available
for property acquisition.
Um, I, I don't know that
staff have a heart set on it.
If you guys wanna strike that from the district.
That's fine. It
Can, well, I have a question.
It's more process.
Are we at the point with maybe a couple of more questions
that this initially has allowed us to hear staff's point
of view to hear from Texas Instruments
and to get to the point where we can give some guidance
knowing that this is complicated
and that it needs to come back
and that it possibly even is going
to require executive session to get some more
business related, um, more confidential data
that we've asked about?
Are we, are we getting close to that point
Testimony?
I you gonna take public testimony?
Yes. But the public will probably be gone by 2:00 AM
or so, so, um, that's a confidence complicated.
All right, counselor, we, excuse me, counselor Walker,
What are the consequences of not combining the districts
potential consequences?
So I'll just speak from my, my, my personal opinion.
Um, I think we could, we could nix all
of the sites in the growth area.
Tiff, I don't know that that's necessary.
Um, I think it is important
as we're submitting an application, DEC to be able
to demonstrate to them that, um, we're trying
to link development sites in growth in the community
through a trans transit network.
And that there's been thought that's put behind that.
And I know like in the comp plan context, you know,
we have the K loops, you know,
the key land use policy areas,
and which are those areas that we're trying to, um,
promote more growth.
And there are nodes throughout the city
where that makes sense.
And so it, we just think it would be, um,
it would make sense to sort of capture that as part
of this development program and,
and further, you know, to provide financial resources for
comp plan implementation in the future.
Um, it, it can be written more narrowly.
We don't have to include all those parcels.
Um, but I think it would be a value to include a few.
I'm not saying that there isn't a value,
I'm just wondering about Counselor West's questions
that made me think, what are the
consequences if we don't do it?
And I wanna make sure that we highlight that as well.
Yeah, counselor, I don't, I don't know there's any,
there's no consequences.
And I guess the other thing I would say is that, um,
you know, districts can be amended at any time, right?
It just takes a little bit of, um, thought and effort
and uh, you know, there's an application process to,
you know, DECD to go go through that.
But, um, I guess the point is that, you know, there's these,
the term of these districts, they last a long time.
And, um, you know, with TI for example,
I think we're on the seventh amendment to that, you know,
over the course of 30 years.
That's not strange or odd, you know, that
that's completely normal
because, you know, the, the legislature amends statute
and like, oh, now we can use TIF for this.
We, we never, we weren't able to use it that way.
So let's amend the district to say that we can,
we can use the, the, the, um, the, the money that way.
Um, or, you know, there's a, a, a developer comes forward
and says, you know, there's this adjacent parcel
that we're really interested in this expansion,
but it's not captured in the original district.
Can we amend it and add another parcel?
And so we're regularly going through that process.
And I would say that even if we add some of these parcels in
and, and a developer steps forward in the future
and says, I, I really appreciate
that you guys put this particular parcel in the tiff,
but the way that it's drafted isn't
really gonna work for us.
Uh, we would like to engage the city, um,
in a very specific tiff for this particular, uh, property.
Um, we could do that.
And the, the example just this past year was one 70 Ocean
Street across the street.
So that was land that was in the downtown tiff,
and we engaged with the developer.
They needed a 30 year tiff.
And you know, they, you know, we had all those conversations
and we decided to amend the downtown tiff, remove
that land area and establish an entirely new
standalone district.
Um, and that could just as easily be done in any parcels
that we, we add, um, in the district today.
So I, I guess what I'm saying is that the map
arguably can be aspirational, you know,
and then we can, we'll fix it later. Okay.
Thank you. Yeah. Okay.
I, I really do understand that there are more questions
to ask and Counselor West if you want to ask some more.
I think you probably should.
No, I'll wait. Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity to ask all the questions.
I did.
Alright. All right. Well then it would be time
to give some feedback to our city manager.
And thank you, Josh. I'm hoping
that this summer you might organize Tiff camp for all of us
and we can just go and learn all kinds of things.
Did I, did I actually see your hand going on this?
We just, public comment? We're just, yes. Oh, I'm sorry.
God, I've been rushing us through
and skipping steps the whole night.
My apologies. Do we have public comment about these matters
of tiffing?
Surprise, surprise. Hello. Okay.
Seeing just a not too much
of a rise here.
Um, I think we'll safely call public comment closed.
Alright, now we're ready. Yes. Councilor
West, since I asked most questions, I'll go first
with asking with my feedback.
Here's where I am on this. I am, I am perfectly willing
to extend the Texas instrument Tiff.
I think that's a good idea. I think we should take advantage
of the new statute.
I think it is too complicated tonight to talk about trying
to combine the Texas instrument Tiff
with the other two areas.
We, I think we should have, if we wanna have those,
we should have some kind of separate conversation
because we have a growth area that's been going since 2027
and we need to really look at the map,
but we haven't gotten any advantage out of it.
And the transitive is really complicated
because of the way it goes along all the different streets.
And there's all kinds of issues there.
For me, he also, when I look at the staff report, and I,
and as you know, I've been on the comprehensive plan
committee for the last three years, so I'm pretty con
familiar with our long-term growth plans for the mall area
and the western part of the city where there we hope a lot
of growth will take place and
that it will be transit oriented.
And I'm referencing particularly pages two
and three of the staff report.
I won't bore you by reading the entire thing,
but the general summary is that we have a lot
of things going on in the main wall area
to categorize catalyze growth
and mixed use development, transit oriented, the possibility
of a transit hub, a lot of bike p infrastructure,
bus stops, et cetera.
And when you look at, I understand that you try
to have a wishlist of everything under the sun when you
adopt a tiff, but when you look at the fact
that this tiff is gonna generate somewhere in the nature
of $8 million over the next 20 years,
why don't we focus on the main mall
and try to really have that grow
and become a, really, have a transit center.
And it talks about having a, um, all the different things
that are going on, the possibility of a parking structure,
the possibility of a seamless access for transit riders in
that area of the community.
So I think it would really serve the interest
of the community for us to focus on extending this
and then expanding the area in that area
around Texas instruments in the mall, including the mall, so
that we can really have a transit hub
and transit focused development
in that part of our community.
And and also, I'll just finish by saying,
because the anticipation is we're not gonna be building
single family homes out there.
We're gonna, it's gonna be dense, it's gonna be apartments.
Those are the kind of uses, excuse me,
that can really support and use transit,
say for the pump Pearl Street Pump Station.
Yes. But it'll do something for transit.
I, I'm sorry, I was having a reaction to what you said
and I was thinking of actually an area of District five
where there probably will be single family homes,
but mostly I think you've said a lot of things
that are true there.
Um, unasked for comments. Um, Councillor Coleman
And the mall area has been my wishlist for having,
because it is climate resilient.
Um, and so we don't have to worry about
what sea level rise that in that area.
And it would be a place where workforce housing could be,
and if the transit's there, we could have less cars and,
and get rid of some of the pavement.
So we don't have a big heat island there.
So, I mean, that would've been my wishlist. So
I'm, so yeah.
So in terms of small areas, guidance back
to the staff is, and
No, I'm just saying I I'm so delighted
to, to have read that.
And are do you want to hit any of the questions?
Not, not any of the others? No.
Other than we need, I would like to see executive sessions
so that they could answer more sensitive questions.
Okay. Thank you. That's, that's good feedback.
Counselor Walker.
Um, so for the first question, do I support moving forward
with the extension of the TI Tiff?
Yes, I do. Um, the second question, do I support the, um,
CEA moving forward?
I do. Um, I think you made a a great argument for that.
And then finally, I do support consolidating all three
of the, the districts.
I think that it gives us more tools in our arsenal
for economic development.
And, you know, I know the wishlist is, is vast,
but to Council West's point about, you know,
focusing transit around the mall area, that is,
I completely agree.
And as a west side resident of the city,
we do need more transit, um, focus on the west side,
but we, we can't forget the middle.
And I'm afraid that if we don't specifically look at
something like you want to do with the transit map,
that we're gonna miss the middle guess yes and yes.
Okay. Thank you.
Who would like to go next? Councilor Pride.
Um, I pretty much agree
with everything Councilor Walker just said.
I also agree that, so that's a yes. Yes and yes for me too.
Just for the record, um, I also agree that
expanding the TIF to include the mall area is a great idea.
Um, I know a while ago GP Cog did, um,
or assisted us with a mall area master plan
and I would love to see that come to fruition.
Mm-hmm. And so, uh, 'cause it's an amazing looking plan
and if you have a
chance to look it up, it's on the internet.
Yes. Um, and,
and I think we as a council should do everything we can
to support any developer interested in putting a piece of
that plan actually on the map. So
I think that was about six years ago.
Something like, like that. Yeah.
Um, councilor Matthews,
did you wanna go on the record at this point?
I support the, uh, definitely support Texas instrument.
Um, I do agree with Natalie about, uh,
definitely isolating the, uh,
including the, uh, main mall area.
I think that's a, uh, great idea. The other two, I guess.
Yeah. Uh, but, uh, I certainly know
that will have more conversation about it,
so I'm not really, I think the staff has got enough
information and then tomorrow morning I'll call Josh
and tell him what I really think of.
Oh no, Just kidding.
Just kidding. Well, he appreciates there'll be some
comment about the link to the presentation in there.
I'm sure. Be a text later.
Um, you wanted to add Counselor West? No.
Hear from everybody and then,
Okay. Thank you.
Alright. Um, counselor Scott.
Um, I am supportive of, uh, extending the,
the tiff I think I would like to understand,
and this is my own education of sort of
what are the economic, uh, aspects of
the TIFF with respect to Texas Instruments
and very, with respect to you and, and the company.
I think just wanna understand, um, the economics
of the TIFF extension request,
which may require an executive session.
Um, I think I'd like to better understand exactly
the sort of mapping
and what the distinctions are between the areas
that are being requested as the extension.
Uh, just because it was not entirely clear,
but I wanna be clear that I'm, I'm supportive of it.
I think it makes sense. Um,
but there's some aspects of it that are not entirely clear.
So I think that would be helpful to continue to look into.
I'm happy to do that myself
and I'm generally supportive of the recommendation.
Okay. Thank you.
Um, I wish, just so I can, oh, do I not say anything?
No, you count. But can I say you count more than
everybody, but can I just, I explain some of
what was on has been in my
mind with what I was saying earlier.
Yes. But you said you wanted to wait
until everybody's finished, so
I know, but then maybe you won't
be persuaded by what I have to say.
Oh, she is just full of tricks. Okay.
Please, counselor West
As a council in the last few years, we've made it clear
that our primary concern about the use of TIF funds is
to try to pay for city facilities for the new buildings
that have, we've been told are gonna cost us $194 million.
Although I think we can do something about that.
I am very concerned about consolidating these tiffs.
I understand the ti tiff
and the 20 year extension is only transit
and the transit related
development on and affordable housing.
But if we take our existing transit tiff,
that doesn't expire until 2039.
And if we take the growth area tiff
and we fold them in these other tiffs, that's
what I think we have to be very careful about.
I'm afraid we are foreclosing the ability
to use those TIF funds to help build our buildings.
And that has not been clear tonight.
And if you look at the list of what is on
with the staff gave us of what they would use the money
for, it's not there.
So I would just ask the council to think about
that very carefully.
And we don't have to decide too much tonight,
except we could decide the CEA for the, for ti the te the,
uh, extension for ti the universally,
everybody wants to include them all.
And then maybe we put over
and ask staff to come back with a more detail
because we, we were, we were
really at a disadvantaged night.
We don't have the maps in front of us.
I mean, they were shown, but we don't have them,
we don't have the wording from those, uh,
from those other TIF districts of
what the revenue can be used for.
So I think we're being asked
to make a decision without really having all
the information in front of us.
So Madam Mayor, did that persuade you?
I was just gonna say, where,
where is King Solomon when you need to make these decisions?
Um, I, and I don't wanna really ask another question,
but to your point about the facilities,
it did seem like there had been some exploration
of the, what else?
And one good answer came back is yes,
Pearl Street Pump Station is, could be a recipient
of, of this funding.
How much more, what else is there?
Um, I, I don't think there's a lot more. What else?
I guess I would just, um,
and I, sorry, I don't mean this as a counterpoint,
but just to sort of, um, elaborate a little bit more.
'cause I completely appreciate your concern, uh,
counselor West, but I, I, um, this district, um, if amended
as being proposed and extended for 20 years
can be subsequently amended.
And so it may be the case that two years from now,
three years from now, whatever, there's a development
that step that comes forward
and they're interested in a parcel that happens to be one
of the ones that we've grouped in this new tif
and we say, um, yeah, wow,
that's gonna be a significant investment.
We can appreciate that you might want to brand new kind
of 30 year TIF
and something that's tailored very specifically
to the development that you're proposing.
We would then amend this TIF to remove that parcel
or multiple parcels, and then we could negotiate a new TIF
and there would be a new baseline that's set for that.
So we'll never be in a situation where
if we include parcels in this district, we've locked
and turned the key in 20 years, you know,
we can't touch them again.
This is gonna be able
to be amended at any point in the future.
We can add more districts, um, parcels to it.
We can remove parcels.
And so there, there will be flexibility.
And, and, and to be completely frank, this is
what staff is anticipating might happen
in and around the mall area.
I I, I do not believe even if we lump some parking lots into
this and say aspirationally, this is where we'd love
to see transit oriented development,
that anything is gonna get built there
inside this TIF district.
I think that if there was gonna be a $50 million,
a hundred million dollars project that comes forward,
we would be amending this district to remove those parcels
and we would be doing a very specific, um, you know,
subsequent tiff like we did
with one 70 Ocean Street across the way.
And so that was why it, it might seem like it, it was, um,
not a lot of care was put into sort of
what specifically the parcels would be in and out.
I think it's, the reason for that is
because I think it's really flexible.
I don't know that we have to put any in,
and I don't know that any have to come out.
Again, it's aspirational.
It demonstrates that we're forward thinking, thinking about
where transit oriented development
and growth would we would like to see throughout the city
linked by transit links.
And then in the future, if we have to mend the district,
then, then so be it.
Thank you Josh. Um, yeah. Yeah.
Um, I was
mostly on team.
Yes. Um, I am persuaded counselor West
that we don't wanna
close off opportunity.
And I, I think all that that means is that we do need
to ask staff to, um, to what?
To, to bring back,
uh, to bring back.
Well, you're asking for guidance on whether council wants
you to bring back something that is mostly going with
what you recommended, but we know we'll probably still need
to be questioned and debated
and we just have to figure out how that's going to happen.
Does any of that make sense?
Okay. Yes. Oh, Josh,
I apologize. Yeah, I,
I just, I, I'd be remiss if I didn't say
that time is of the essence here
because we're facing a Jan a June 30, 20, 26
expiration of the district.
So we do have months, but five months
and just knowing how long some of these things take,
if we want an executive session and another workshop
and like, that worries me a little bit.
And so, um, uh,
We're, we're not gonna be offended if,
if staff are not gonna be offended if you say, listen, we,
we just want this more focus around the mall.
Like, if that's where the council's at, that's fine.
I, I would rather have solid guidance
than it be ambiguous leaving this meeting.
Um, we would like to come, you know,
and granted that an executive session probably would be
good, just so that they,
the company could share some more proprietary information
with you all and give you a better sense of, you know,
why they, they need the, the continued tax incentive.
But, um, ideally, I,
it would be great if we had a public hearing in April
on this so that we could submit it to DECD for approval, uh,
with a little bit of cushion before
June, April. So we seem to
be in February, March.
Um, exactly. Okay.
Well appreciated.
Um, and I think
that counsel would prefer to have an executive session.
I heard two counselors ask for that. Two, no. Okay.
So that is not the majority opinion apparently.
Um, yes, counselor Scott,
if you have any brilliant ideas right
now, now is the topic, well,
I just wonder if there's a separation between
the TIFF extension as is, which I think
Texas Instrument is asking for,
and the consideration to the council of the extension
of the district, when, which can be sort of amended
and adjusted at any time.
And if those are two separate paths, then
I wonder if there is council
unanimous council approval on the TIFF specific extension
that's being requested
and further discussion helpful around
the expansion areas and the combination of the districts.
Mm-hmm. Which seems to be mm-hmm.
A little more of an issue than the specific TIFF extension.
Um, thank you for that.
You, um, is, would it be helpful
to staff if there was council agreement in just a few
minutes that we sort of did separate the two
and that the one that has a deadline,
you get some clearer guidance for?
I think what the challenge is gonna be is that, um,
when we, when we, when we amend the TI
district, um, DECD is gonna want to understand
how we're gonna comply with the new statute
being 75% of TIF revenues have to be used for TOD and
or affordable housing.
And we need to be able to articulate within the written
development program how we're gonna do that.
And if we don't expand the boundaries of the district,
I think it's gonna be very challenging
to write that amendment
Councilor West, Expand the boundaries of the district
to include them all
and take the paragraphs
that you have in pages two and three.
I just have to tell you that the growth district includes
Madison, which is over on the eastern waterfront.
People are gonna go ballistic when they start.
We, we didn't include that counselor. Yeah, we
Didn't, they, the growth, the,
the transit district includes a transit hub in the,
you know, PK Realty parcel.
People are gonna go ballistic when they see that. Now
We, we removed that as well in
The, but I know, but we've gotta have another workshop if
you're gonna do that kind of stuff, because we,
we didn't have the maps.
We didn't have a chance to look at it
until you came in here tonight.
And, uh, it's just, it's too, you know,
why can't you just do the TI extension, include them all,
include all these provisions that we're committed to.
I mean, these are really important things that we want
to do in that part of our community.
Uh, and I don't mean just the mall, the area from ti all
around across and including the mall area.
That's a good district. It's contiguous.
And then we have a, a lot of goals and a lot of objectives
and, and a lot of things we want to do there.
And the planning directors here, and he is raising his hand.
Oh, good. Heaven. Alright, hang on for just one second.
There are some things
for which our city has asked the state for extensions.
Is this one of them in terms of meeting a deadline?
She's looking at you. I, yeah.
So I'm looking at anybody who has the answer? Anyone?
Anyone.
I, I don't think they extend tiff deadlines.
It's expires when it expires
The case. Wow.
Worth a shot. We, we can't bust the June 30 deadline.
Thank you. Um, Milan, is there something that you wanted
to come to the microphone for?
Um, me land invited the planning director.
Um, Scott, could we post the map? Just great.
So, uh, Josh Leah, the economic development team and I met
and trying to draft this map and,
and considered a number of different things.
I think some of what's been discussed about the mall makes
total sense, that's why it's on the map.
Um, we shrunk the TIFF district as it, the transit tiff
as it exists today to really focus on, uh,
two things primarily.
Number one is what the comp plan draft says
and what's been relatively well vetted
by the comp plan committee and council.
Things that are not really hot button issues, for instance,
we didn't include the Eastern waterfront,
really focused on the things
that people felt really good about
from a growth perspective.
Just as a policy matter, we like to see growth there.
So that was one key thing we were looking for.
And the second lens,
and I think this one frankly, is even more important,
is areas where, uh, property owners
or other kinds of activity have been coming
through the planning and development office expressing an
interest in investment and where there's known barriers
to the investment, where the city can be a catalyst
to change the situation.
Um, and so those are the places that we are really trying
to emphasize if the city was gonna make strategic
investments to try and spur on increased economic
development activity, that these are the few sites
where we actually see that being possible
and not, you know, a hail Mary.
Uh, let's see if we can get something going just
by laying on an incentive that's sort of passive.
Um, so for both of those reasons,
the mall makes total sense.
Um, and I think that's why it's resonating with folks.
The one, the secondary area
that if this thing was gonna get trimmed down
and we needed an answer quickly
that I really want the council to consider carefully is
that Main Street, lower Main Street,
virtually every property along that corridor has engaged
with the planning office in some format or another.
It is severely hampered by a series of small sites
that have very, uh, hard time
addressing the longstanding infrastructure needs of the area
because it's been built out.
There's brownfield contaminants there.
We really could do a little
to get a lot done in those areas.
And in my opinion, that's where we'd want
to open up some economic development tools to us.
And Tiff is one of the key ones.
So I say that about all the sites, there's something like
that to say about all of them,
but if you really wanted to pair this down, the mall
and Main Street are really critical.
And I would strongly advocate that we focus on those two
and remember that we don't get anything done on
infrastructure alone by funding projects 100%.
We typically do a match to create a design plan,
and then we get state or regional funding
to give us the rest of it.
You see that in my budgets all the time.
And when it comes to actually building out infrastructure,
particularly sewer, water, trans, uh, transportation,
we're using federal and state dollars
and they are lifting a lot of the, the bill for
that we need matches.
So yes, they're fragments of the total bundle of millions
of investments that we need in order to, you know,
hit everything on that development list.
But we're not doing it alone.
And we need to just hit the right levers
with the right partners at the right time.
Um, I would really hate
to see Main Street go if we were gonna bear this down.
Well, I guess we know
who should have done the presentation tonight.
Can I get say that out loud?
Alright, well, someone might be out of order.
Um, I counselor West. One more clarifying question.
One more clar clarifying.
So the transit corridor goes 500 feet back along each the
corridor, is that right?
But if it is overlapping another TIF district,
the underlying TIF district is the one that prevails.
Is that accurate?
Yes, yes, generally. Yeah. Yeah.
I wish the map was clear.
Yeah, Milan made that now Bachelor
Pride, I, I guess
I missed that, but I guess my question is would, um,
would it be overly troublesome to bring to us
a couple versions and you get one more shot when we do fi
you know, at first read to make your case,
but the council had, would have the option of doing the,
let's just include lower Main Street Mall
and TI in the Tiff versus another Tiff
that does include everything you've spoken about.
Um, and, and it, you know, we can sort of compare those two
with maps and Yeah.
And lots of, uh, visuals
that are very helpful, I guess to everyone really.
Um, and then sort of maybe educate ourselves a little more
with the materials before we get here.
Get to first three.
I, um, I just wanna say I really
appreciate all these comments.
I, I, it might not seem like it
because we're kind of having a bit of a back, you know,
a back and forth and whatnot,
but I, these are the same conversations we were all
having as staff, right?
Because it's not, there's no like slam dunk here and stuff,
but I think one of the challenges is gonna be that, let,
let's just say for the moment that we only focus on the mall
area, it still is gonna comprise a bunch of the areas
that are transit corridors within the current transit tiff.
And therefore, instead of Sunset that district,
we're gonna get into a full blown amendment
to the Transit Tiff district.
And now we're amending two districts at the same time.
What's the geography? What's in, what's out?
Oh, let's not have Liberty Shipyard this time, let's do the,
and it's, we were trying to avoid that
and make it as just sort of straightforward as possible.
We recognize that there are some areas in the current,
the current districts today, you know,
and they go back years
that if they were created from scratch today,
we wouldn't include those areas.
And so the map, we haven't, it's, this isn't perfect,
but we tried to focus on, you know, as Milan was saying,
on on the areas that require the most, the,
that have the levers in the right place
to focus on the right nodes and the right corridors.
And as you can see, just with what shaded this is,
it's almost entirely the mall in Main Street, you know?
Um, but we thought, geez, you know, it, it'd be, it'd be,
it wouldn't be right if we sunset these two districts
and our transit district becomes
just the west end of the city.
It makes sense to have the Broadway corridor through,
to Knight Village, mill Creek, through to SMCC
and we'll just lop off a bunch of the other parcels that,
um, you know, that we don't, we don't need to keep.
And frankly, if we've, to your point, councilor West, if,
if none of the parcels that are shown in the growth area,
TIFF end up in the new tiff that, you know,
we're not gonna, that's fine.
I mean, we just wanna make sure particularly that, um,
you know, the cash corner area
and the greater mall area is, has good coverage so
that we can do infrastructure investment there.
One final question, I promise
you your third final question may be asked.
Okay, so the transit tiff, TIFF revenues,
how are they restricted in their use?
They're, I have the statute if you want to see it,
but there's, there, there's a number of things
that they're authorized to do.
They can pay for public safety improvements.
So if we built a new police station, they could pay help,
pay for some of the costs for that, um,
And do our documents for the transit.
That, that, I don't know that's, but,
but we've been, been amending them
because some of these are recent, some
of these things weren't possible when these
TIF districts were created, right?
You couldn't do anything with public safety buildings,
nevermind municipal buildings.
And that's all changed. And so as we've been updating TIFs
for other reasons, we've been trying to include those, uh,
in the project description so
that they can be a possibility.
I don't know if the current TOD has
that language in it or not.
Um, do, do, do either of you know, Ellen or Josh?
I don't. We have amended the district,
so it probably doesn't, we could amend it for that.
And if we merge the TI district
with this transitive district, can we then use,
still use the same amount of funds for public buildings,
like public safety buildings?
So counselor, I, I brought this slide up again
because this has the table that shows you
how much money is being generated by the districts.
And so the transit tiff, it's, it's $37,000 a year,
But it's 20 years and they're high growth areas,
Right? But if there was
growth that were to occur,
we could amend the transit, the new transitive
to remove the area
and create a new district to designate the money
for public safety buildings and city hall.
But, but ultimately if it, if it's stayed in
as the current law under the, anything
that's extended under the current law does not allow, uh,
debt service payments for new municipal facilities.
So that's something that we've talked
to the state about possibly adding in the future.
The, uh, I think the DECD was, um, supportive
of us making that request,
but as of right now, it wouldn't be.
But to Josh's point, you could always pull things out if
that was the intended use
and create a separate TIFF district that would allow it.
I, Aside from the TTI parcel,
which Ari has spent its life mm-hmm.
In that manner.
I don't have a question. I have a
Suggestion. I I
also have an idea that we're probably gonna wrap this up
with guidance to staff that most
of the counselors are saying yes, yes, yes.
To the three questions.
And that it does sound,
and I absolutely appreciate
Councilor West all points that you've made.
And it does sound like there's gonna be ongoing need even
with Yes, yes, yes.
To build in some attention to your concerns.
And so I am hoping that staff's gonna be able to do that.
Josh, you're gonna, yes, you're gonna do it. We, we
Will do our, we'll do our, I, I appreciate the concerns.
It does feel like we need to
stop our discussion here.
We've given the guidance, that's what we've asked to do.
All right. So without further ado,
we'll move to public hearings.
And action. Um, I'd ask the clerk to read the ordinance,
but I'd also say that anybody who wants to stand up
and stretch in the council, in the folks you're welcome to.
Um, it kind of feels necessary and good. Alright.
It's making me nervous. Madam City clerk,
you please. Now we're making,
I didn't see others that I'm thinking in front of me.
Alright, thank I stood up
Guys.
The stretching time has now merged into quiet time. Thanks.
Um, can we hear reading of ordinance number 15?
Ordinance number 15, 25 26 amending chapter 27 zoning
regarding miscellaneous amendments.
First reading passed on January 20th, 2025.
Second reading is this evening,
and Pastor Quiet is five affirmative votes.
And this will be a roll call vote.
Scott, did you want As typical on second read,
there's no, you know, we've,
we've done the formal presentation at first read.
So just as a reminder, there's around 13 different, uh,
miscellaneous updates that planning department, um,
has proposed, uh, that were discussed last time.
Planning Director is here. If you have
any other questions on those.
Just as a reminder, planning board did, uh,
recommend unanimous approval.
Uh, and so we recommend continue
to recommend approval this evening.
Okay. Thank you so much.
Um, did we have any counselor questions?
No, we do not. Do we have any public comment
on this particular item?
Item? I do not see public comment. It's closed on this item.
What is the wish of the council Councilor
Matthews move for passage.
Thank you. Councilor Matthews second. Councillor West.
Thank you, counselor West.
And it needs to be a roll call vote
because it is a zoning ordinance.
Counselor Coleman? Yes.
Counselor Matthews. Ms. Smith Counselor Pride? Yes.
Counselor Walker? Yes. Counselor West? Yes.
Mayor Tipton? Yes. And I do not see Councilor Scott.
Councilor Scott? Well, oh, councilors. Councilor Scott.
We're voting now. I'm sorry.
We moved fairly quickly through our second read
of Ordinance 15 25, 26.
We have six votes in the affirmative at the moment.
Yes, I'm in favor. Thank you. Thank you.
It's the unanimous vote.
And we're off to do miscellaneous amendments over
there in Zoning world.
Thank you. Could you read the next order?
Madame City Clerk? Clerk
Order. 1 44 25 26
Granting the Barkery Dog Bar at
180 Waterman Drive.
Unit one. A food establishment
with liquor license passage requires a majority vote.
Thank you. Do we have any questions from counselors?
Do we have any public comment on this item?
I think I, I, my comment would be
that Well, is is there public comment?
No. Okay. Public comment's closed. Any move for passage?
Move for passage. Thank you.
Seconded by Councilor Walker. Anything?
Yeah, just real quick, uh, gentleman.
Nate is here tonight, uh, that, uh, is open.
The Barkery, uh, they had a soft opening on
Saturday, very well attended.
Uh, I encourage everybody to, uh,
go on Thursday, 1130.
1130 noon, noon time, uh, for a Ruben, cut
for the, uh, and we wish you the best of luck.
Thank you. Did you wanna say anything? Councilor Walker?
I'm very excited. And,
and my understanding is the business allows you
and encourages you to bring your dogs
with you when you hang out.
Well, you probably should have, but we can't have. Alright.
Alright. So and so. Thank you.
Um, can we have a vote?
We don't need to do roll call on this one. Yes.
All in favor, unanimous.
We're going to have lots of fun
and barking at the Barky Dog Bar.
Thank you. All right,
we're moving into action on old and new business.
Our first item is, um, well,
can you read, read our first item, please? Yes. Mayor.
Order 1 45 25 26 Approving the property abatement request
for case 25 0 1.
Pastor Crows majority vote.
Okay. So to be, I just was asked to clarify
that this is a single case of an abatement request from one
of our South Portland residents.
And, um, during our executive disc
executive session discussion,
I think we realize there's need for an amendment.
Do we have someone who will motion for
that amendment? Usually
We amend after public comment
and after the method is on the
Floor. Oh, I, sorry.
I didn't,
for some reason I thought we weren't taking public comment
on this particular thing.
I guess we don't take public comment.
We don't public comment, but we first there's a motion on
the floor and then a motion to amend. So,
Alright. Motion.
Thank you. Councilor West, your motioning.
Can we a second?
Yes. I'll second it. And Counselor Pride is seconded
now it, now it's on the third. Okay.
Um, and Counselor West is giving up her time,
and I'm going to make a motion to amend this
order number 1 45 25 26 to strike everything
after ordered to the last word in the main
paragraph, which is balance.
And instead amend that to say, ordered that,
um, the city council, uh, finds,
or, sorry, I had this in my head a second ago.
Or, the city council denies the request
for a poverty abatement, um, for the,
for case number 26 dash oh one
that was discussed in executive session.
And then further amend it to remove the fiscal note
of 5 50 16 5 1, and make it zero.
I'll second at that. Okay.
So we have a second on the amendment.
Let's vote on the amendment unless there's any discussion.
I don't think there is. Can we have a vote on the
amendment in favor?
Let's make that six of seven.
Councilor Walkers had to be gone for a moment.
Um, and now we need to vote on the, on the,
um, main motion.
Motion. The main motion. Sorry, I've lost words. Okay.
All in favor of the main motion amended
Main Motion. The
amended the main motion as amended. Thank you so much.
Um, we'll just I guess do that six to seven.
Sorry. I think we say that she was, I mean,
But she wasn't there for
the first one, so just leave it as
Yeah, just leave it. Okay.
Um, Madam City Clerk,
if you wouldn't mind reading Resolve, well,
not reading the whole resolve,
but what we're coming to next.
Resolve number 5 25 26, a resolution
regarding federal immigration enforcement activity
and community safety
and wellbeing passage requires majority vote.
Thank you very much. And if counsel will allow me,
I was going to say something about this resolution.
Um, it has been posted publicly since Thursday.
I wanted to be clear that counsel is
considering a resolution regarding, um,
recent federal immigration enforcement activity in
and around South Portland.
The resolution has been reviewed by before by council.
Um, it has not been discussed simply reviewed.
It's been reviewed by our city manager, by our police chief,
by our communications director.
Um, is there anyone else on that list? I don't think so.
So what the resolution is, it's a statement
of concern about real fear
and disruption that many
of our residents have been experiencing.
It's a reaffirmation that everyone in the city deserves
to feel safe going to work, school, or the grocery store.
It is a call for transparency, clear identification
and accountability when federal enforcement activity occurs.
And it's a reminder that trust
and public safety go hand in hand.
It does not attempt to interfere with federal law
or federal authority.
It does not change how our police or our city staff operate,
and it does not prevent lawful enforcement actions.
Um, I would just say one more thing, which is that
the resolution recognizes that immigrants
to the United States are an essential part
of South Portland and Maine.
They contribute to our economy, healthcare system, schools,
small businesses, fishing and lobstering, construction
and service in industries.
The resolution acknowledges
that recent increased enforcement activity has caused fear,
disrupted daily life,
and raised concerns about safety and communication.
Um, I am the person that brought the resolution forward
to my fellow counselors,
and I will just say from my point of view,
it's the responsibility of a body like our council
to make a statement when community wellbeing is affected,
even if those issues are occurring
because of action that is outside local control.
That's why I thought it might be important
to bring it forward and see if we could
find council support.
And now I will stop speaking.
Um, is there anyone else who wanted to say
a question on our council before we open for public comment?
I don't see questions. Do we have Oh,
I do see questions. I just wanted
If I could move her passage
That's after public comment.
I think we should comment. Yes. It's gonna be a race.
So do we hear, do we hear, um,
does anyone still with us have a public comment
to make about our resolution?
Should, and we have
a person.
Thank you so much. Could you say your name?
You don't have to say your whole address.
You might wanna say your street.
Thank you. Mayor Tipton. Uh, Mr. Ian Counselors.
My name is Alex Redfield.
I live on Cooper Street in South Portland.
Um, I've had the privilege of working with
around 300 community members, uh,
over the past two weeks in facilitating the collection
and distribution of mutual aid to neighbors and friends
and families that have felt under
threat over the last two weeks.
Um, I've also seen five-year-old kids
get scared right next to my daughter at Brown School.
Uh, and, and the combination of being sort of
behind the scenes in a super anonymous signal chat
and in person seeing the tangible effects of the, uh,
enhanced immigration enforcement operations has been really
jarring to me as a person.
So I want to thank you Mayor Tipton
for introducing the resolution
and for the words of solidarity
and support that are extended
or could be extended by the council to, uh, our friends
and neighbors who have different origin stories
and passed to South Portland.
Um, would also encourage either through an amendment
to this resolution or either action by the city, uh,
following the footsteps of the Portland City Council
that he took last night to, uh, request that the Governor
Institute a 60 day eviction moratorium to prevent, uh,
folks from being displaced.
From the last two weeks we've seen, again, both personally
and, uh, more broadly,
that rent relief has been the hardest gap to fill.
People in South Portland are stepping up to help people
with groceries, with rides, to work, giving rides
to strangers, to SMCC.
Everyone is doing what they can
and what we can't do is pay people's rent.
Uh, we can, yes, uh, and maybe we can,
but the idea that an elected body has a role
to play now in making sure that over the next three weeks,
the folks who chose physical safety over a paycheck,
uh, there are tools at the council's disposal.
And I'm not a lawyer. I don't, I'm trying to learn things.
I learned a lot about Tiffs, uh, and, uh,
but what I do know with,
and again, if I had a ti graph calculator,
this might be more accurate,
but, uh, about 18% of the city is identifies as non-white.
About 42%
of main households are living paycheck, paycheck to paycheck.
My math says that could be 3000 people in South Portland
that are really on the edge right now.
And the last time the city enacted an eviction moratorium,
that was when red bank property owners
raised rents dramatically.
That was a year after the state
of emergency ended from Governor Mills that ended in June
of 2021 and the city enacted it,
its moratorium in 2022 again, if I read it correctly.
Exactly. So I, I think the tools that you have available
to you should be explored
and they should be explored immediately
because it's a cost neutral option to the city.
It allows people to get back
to work without losing their homes
and then incurring the sort of traumatic cascade of damage
that is done to those kids and those families.
And please do everything you can,
including past this resolution. Thanks.
Thank you so much for your comment,
Mayor Tiffin, just to point for, I we were,
it's really late already.
And to have, um, public comment go off of the topic
of the resolution, um,
before us is a little bit,
it means it's just gonna keep us here a lot longer.
So I would hope that you would remind people to
stay on the topic of the resolution
and not talk about a moratorium,
which is not at all part of what we're doing.
We do it not yet anyway.
Well, not in this resolution.
We're not gonna do a moratorium and a resolution. We do
That re ordinance. The resolution potentially
could be amended.
Right. But not, you can't do it a
moratorium and a resolution.
You could do it in the form of an ordinance. So
True, true, true, true.
Yeah. Okay. Off script.
I think that what you've heard tonight is to the, is that we
as a city have already begun exploring league.
Is there a legal way to do a moratorium so far
that does not seem like that is going
to happen in South Portland, but we continue to explore.
So since we've already introduced that, I understand
that people might wanna make comment,
but you're going to have to make comment in such a way
that it pertains to the resolution.
So, hello. Hi.
First our next artful commenter, I suppose. Thank you.
Thank you, mayor today. And
I'm, I'm certainly not, I don't want to
come off like I'm saying.
Oh, ignore that guy. Not at all. So,
Uh, thank you for, um, the time to opportunity to speak.
Um, I, uh, I would like to ask
that this resolution be amended to do
as introduce yourself.
Oh yeah, sorry. Yes, of course. Chelsea bn.
I live at Margaret Street.
Thank, um, uh, I would like to ask
that this resolution be amended to, um, do
as Portland counselors did last night and,
and make a, include a direct ask to Governor Mills
to implement a, um, temporary,
uh, moratorium on evictions.
Um, as Alex said before,
before me, we have, um, continued
to be really concerned about the ability of,
of our neighbors to, to cover their rents.
Um, the resolution talks about
how every person should have the right to feel safe going
to work, school, or the grocery store.
And the fact is that they did not feel safe
and particularly going to work.
Those ramifications, um, will last for a long time, um,
because many people don't have the resources to, to cover
that lost income.
Um, so I think that asking
for a moratorium now from the governor, um, in addition
to pursuing it locally, locally is really essential.
Um, I would also like
to see the city use, uh, its resources to
consider rent relief, um, to make sure
that we aren't just delaying a crisis here.
Um, and also to protect landlords.
And I have three questions specific to that.
One, how much money is in the city's rainy day fund?
How is that money allocated outside
of a regular budget process?
What is that process? And could the city consider funding a
temporary program through the general, um,
assistance office, but distinct from
what is already offered there to support people
who couldn't go to work last month? Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Do we have additional public comment
related to the resolution?
Hello?
Hi, Uh, Eleni Richardson, 54 Sylvan Road.
Um, thank you for letting us stay here,
even though I just arrived, um, all night.
As we now have our opportunity to speak to the resolution.
Um, I would like to make an observation that, um,
I really wish that there was more flexibility in the way the
agenda is prepared if, um, particularly when it relates
to discussions on marginalized populations,
to have them near the end of the agenda.
Um, the optics just aren't great.
And, you know, I, as a person
that's still learning Robert's rules
and has a hard time following those rules, IIII like
to think that we have some flexibility, um,
to use our creative minds to, to achieve the goal of, um,
transparency and public participation in your agendas.
Um, I would like to request
that the resolution be amended to provide for a directive
to Governor Mills to issue a 60 day moratorium,
just like our city, sister city across the bridge
just did last night.
Um, a moratorium isn't gonna pay the rent, we know that.
Um, but it's gonna put a pause on things
and it's gonna, um, allow our families to
breathe more deeply and calmly given the, the terror
that they've been living under, um, in, uh,
the past several weeks.
Um, I, whether
or not we, the, the, um,
counselor's prides point about what we can and can't say
and what's tangible to the resolution, what's not, um, I,
I wanna, you know, whether
or not this is off board, sorry,
I'm not quite sure when I would've had the opportunity
to say this tonight, um,
because I was only just able to arrive, um, the, the concept
that, um, the former speaker was just speaking about,
you know, what can the city be doing financially to support,
um, rent relief is something that I hope all
of your brains are considering right now.
Excuse me, Ms. Richardson.
Yeah, if you could keep the remarks only
because this is not open public comment,
it is public comment specifically on the agenda item,
But I hope that it's put a bug in your ear
and I hope that we can, um, you know, think about
how the city can, can do something a little bit more than,
than put words on a paper. Thank you.
Okay. That, that was germane to the resolution. Thank you.
Do we have anyone else who would like
to speak specifically on the topic of this resolution?
Good evening. My name is Hannah Taner.
I live at on Florence Street.
Um, and I am appreciative of the resolution at hand,
and I want to encourage you further to amend the resolution.
Um, in order to request a 60 day, um,
moratorium mon rent eviction as a landowner
and a landlord, it is important
that we support our community in staying here
and create a more vibrant community.
Um, and as the city council has noted,
these are just words that the, um,
resolution at hand is stating that it's, um, here
in order to, um, state what the values
of this city are at a time when, um,
those values are being encroached upon.
Um, and I would encourage the city council to take steps
beyond those words to utilize the financial,
um, uh, resources that the city has
to protect, um, is to residents further from, um,
being displaced and being abducted. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Do we have anyone else who had made
public comment about the resolution?
Hi, uh, my name's Evie Woodland.
Um, I live on Beverly Street.
Um, I wasn't gonna speak, I'm a local attorney
and I regularly handle evictions.
Um, I just wanted to urge you all to think about, um, uh,
well to go back to make this, uh, relevant
to the issue we're discussing here.
Um, I would ask that you amend the resolution
to make a direct call to the governor, um, to issue a,
a temporary moratorium on evictions.
And I just wanna, um, lay out a little bit
of a, a personal story.
Um, someone through the last couple weeks that become,
has become a very near and dear friend to me, um,
is now at risk of eviction, um, with a six month old baby.
And I would just ask that when you're thinking about
what you're gonna do here tonight, you think about, um,
the very small children that are at serious risk
of being displaced from their shelter
and from their homes, um,
and potentially becoming homeless in the middle of February.
And thanks a lot.
Thank you. Any other public comment
about the resolution?
Hi, um, Julia Edwards. I live on Dawson Street.
Um, I echo pretty much everything that's been said by, um,
my fellow citizens prior to this, uh, three minute block.
Um, I think to tie it all together for how this relates
to the re resolution is there's some, uh, belief
that maybe it doesn't go far enough
and that we have wanted you to do more.
And so please do more.
Um, all of this ties to the resolution
because the resolution is one a couple weeks late
and also, uh, does not, um, I think
strongly enough reflect the values
and what it means means to be a citizen of South Portland.
Um, it, it could be, could be beef here,
you could be a lot stronger in, in your language.
Um, and kind of the, the lines
that you're gonna draw in the sand for, um,
how we respect each other and how our community operates.
So, um, I think, yeah, all of this ties there.
There is no end to how this ties
to the resolution in my opinion.
Um, I also really wanna, um, point out the,
it's not just optics, it's not just poor optics.
It is actual disrespect to people in our community
that either aren't safe enough
to be able to come here and speak.
But even if they were, they would have to wait
until 9 25 at night to do it.
When we were talking about things that, yeah,
they were on your agenda for I'm sure a very long time
and they're important, but there are things
that are more important to signal to our community.
Um, and I, I really feel like that was a big misstep, um,
on the part of this body not being creative enough
to put something like this up at the top.
You know, ice has left, which they haven't.
Um, and we're just now putting out a resolution to,
to say anything about it, like, come on, like really
that the best we can do.
Like, and then you make us wait for three
and a half hours to talk about it.
That's, um, that's hard to stomach
and that's hard to go to the people that, um, my colleagues
and I are, are directly supporting, um, every day
because they don't have anyone else to support them
and say, you matter and here's how we know you matter.
That that, that does not show it.
So, um, please do better with
that in the future when you're dealing with
and responding to and being flexible
and creative, um, in responding
to things in crises in the moment.
Thank you.
Anyone else with public comment on the resolution?
Aha.
Rebecca Howland, Kayla Road. I'll be super quick.
Um, I would just like to say I'm also in support
of amending a resolution to call for Governor Mills
to put in, uh, eviction moratorium.
Thank you.
Thank you. Oh
Yeah. Rosemary dangelo
is pleasantdale.
This is related to the resolution.
Uh, my mother's given name was Philomena Marie Borelli,
a beautiful Italian name
and I would've been proud to carry that name.
She took my father's name upon marriage
and became Mina Marie DeAngelos.
When my parents moved
to Char Beach from Scully Square in Boston,
her new American friends called her Phil
and soon she became Phyllis.
It was a way to blend in to be accepted. It was safer.
I cringe when I look at her headstone Phyllis de Angelis.
That's not who she is.
It's not who she was when I was born, I was to be named
after my paternal Nana Rosina, Maria D'Angelo.
I would've been proud to carry that name,
but my parents instead named me Rosemarie.
It was a way to be more American
to blend in, to be accepted.
It was safer. We were the only Italians in Char Beach.
The jokes were about Italians, the slurs, the stereotypes,
but we weren't as isolated
as the family whose mother was from Puerto Rico.
They had brown skin, so they were even lower than we were.
I have delivered groceries, notarized documents,
provided translations, bought maxi pads.
And for the past three days, I have driven a friend to work
'cause he does not feel safe to drive himself.
This is where we are today, today,
2026 in the United States of America.
How did we get here? How did this happen tonight?
Many stood to pledge allegiance to our flag,
the only pledge we make over and over again.
And I always wonder why it did not say I did not stand.
Because in that pledge it says with liberty
and justice for all.
We say it as if it's true, but it doesn't say citizens.
It says all, but it's not true.
We do not have liberty and justice for all.
So I refuse to pledge an allegiance to a flag, to a country
that does not do what we say in that pledge.
I support the resolve,
but I also support the halt on eviction.
I am truly pleased with how our community has come together
during these challenging times,
provided rides, bought groceries, walked kids to
and from the bus stop, paid rent so much more.
But I would ask for one more thing.
I would ask that you talk to someone,
someone you don't know, someone who you look different from.
When you look in that mirror
and make them your friend, invite them to your home,
have dinner, cook with them 30 seconds, talk with them,
laugh with them, learn from them, listen
to them, let them in.
That is when things will really change.
That is when we move towards liberty
and justice for all, I promise.
Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anyone else who would like
to make a comment about the resolution?
Seeing no further comment,
public comment on this agenda item is closed.
There are a couple questions.
Um, yes, thank you.
Yep. So, um, there was a question.
There were three questions that um, I had heard.
One was, um, what does the city have in its rainy day fund?
So I'm, I'm gonna just infer
that you mean the city's fund balance so that
that's the accrual over time of, you know,
more revenue taking in than expenses going out
and um, uh, things that, you know, haven't been restricted
as we heard tonight in the audit.
Um, so this is timely.
The draft audit, we, um,
have approximately 28, 23 $0.8 million in, um,
undesignated fund balance.
Um, of that 16.8 million is dedicated to your policy
that we keep nine to 12%, um,
for those emergency situations.
Um, like most communities have, uh, that's of your,
of your overall budget.
So if there's a taxpayer that leaves town
or whatever, um, there's a COVID hits all these things
that's kind of like a emergency reserve.
Um, so that leaves about $7 million.
The finance director, um, I don't have the number in front
of me, but has estimated the overage from the school
that they're gonna have to dip into this year.
Um, because there's gonna be another projected overage
likely would be between one to 2 million.
Um, there's about, uh, 3 million in CIP
that we use every year from fund
balance to pay for those things.
So that leaves just about $2 million. That, Scott,
Will you please say for folks what CIP
Means? Sorry. Capital. That's
where
how you fund your capital budget every year is, is um,
is out of, uh, fund balance.
Thank you. So that leaves about $2 million.
Um, and traditionally overage is like that.
You've put towards one time expenses in the budget.
You've carried it over to the next fiscal year
to help fund CIP projects.
Um, in case there's not fund balance
or a significant amount that's returned.
But, um, but that, that's just kind of a breakdown
of what you have available.
Um, that, um, in that, in, in your
undesignated fund balance, um, how could
that be allocated out of the budget process?
So the council, um, is,
is technically free at any point throughout the year
to pass an order
to allocate money from undesignated fund balance
for a specific per purpose.
And, um, whether
or not you'd use that to fund a temporary program
for rental assistance through ga, that would be a question
for you all as if that's something that you wanted to,
um, uh, pursue.
Alright, thank you very much. I hope that was understood.
I kind of intuited that the person
who asked the question might have been referring back to
what the governor calls the state's rainy day fund.
And we do not have that in South Portland per se.
We have what's got just explained. So, thank you.
Um, alright. Where are we?
We, we can't take any more public comment or questions now?
Questions? No, sorry. Thanks. Um, okay.
Um, I think we are at the, what is the wish
of the council part of our meeting on this agenda item?
Um, what is the wish of the council?
A move for passage, councilor Scott moves for passage.
Do we have a second Counselor? Pride?
Um, alright, we have a motion
for the resolution on the floor.
We can have discussion.
Um, and I also
have a suggested motion for an amendment.
I would, I would need to make this motion now. Get a second.
We would have discussion about this particular amendment
and then we would vote on the resolution.
I move to amend the numerical section
of resolve number 5 25 26 by adding
a new paragraph, following paragraph six
and renumbering the remaining paragraphs.
The new section would say, uh,
the city council directs the city manager to communicate
with Governor Janet Mills
and appropriate state of Maine officials to request
consideration of a temporary statewide 60 day moratorium
on residential evictions for households
that have experienced substantial financial hardship
associated with the recent surge in federal immigration
enforcement activity.
That would be what I would propose it,
it at it's basically an advocacy statement asking our city
manager to pursue it doesn't create
or impose any local regulatory requirements.
I wonder if I have a second for that amendment.
Oh, counselor Walker. Thank you.
So now we would discuss the amendment.
The only thing I would just like to add
this council is a team.
I take that very seriously. I did circulate the petition.
People have had time to cogitate about that.
This idea for this amendment came quickly as of yesterday,
seeing the lead that Portland was taking.
Um, I just want counselors to know
that this is not an end run, it's an idea for an amendment.
So, did you wanna say anything Counselor Walker? Sure.
I support the amendment.
I think as we've seen tonight, adding our adding voices
to a call amplifies it
and I think it is our duty to do so.
Thank you. Any other counselors, counselor Pride?
Sure. Um, you know, there's an extent to which
the state preempts the field when it comes
to the eviction process.
It's got a very, uh, well established way
of doing evictions, um, that's in Title 14.
And because of that, it limits the ability
of municipalities to do anything about it.
I think the last time we even considered doing it ourselves,
the, our Corporation council at
that time really warned us against it
and thought we probably wouldn't withstand a lawsuit.
Um, anyway, I think this is the proper way to go, I think
because it's a, it's very much a, a a state preempted area
of law that the governor's the right person to,
to move the ball on this.
And, you know, maybe we get something emergency from the
legislature, but, um, I, I think
that's a i i I am fully in support of the internet.
Okay. Co other counselors want
to speak on the amendment?
Not on that side. Over on that side. Councilor Scott,
I, I just wanna say thank you for
voicing the motion and the amendment.
I think we are probably all in agreement
and I think generally there is a feeling of
what more can we do?
And I really appreciate your leadership on
the current resolution.
And I think our general hope is to continue to work towards
what else we can do as a council.
So this is a step forward
and I hope we continue discussions on what else we can do.
Thank you, counselor Scott. Anyone else?
Any other counselor on the amendment? No.
Alright. Well, if we're not discussing the amendment
anymore, I think we're voting on the amendment.
Do we have, um, who all in favor of passing
the amendment?
Alright, we have a unanimous passage of the amendment.
Um, I will share this with you
so we get our amendment incorporated into the resolve.
Now who is it that moved for passage of the Resolve 'cause?
Councilor Scott. Councilor Scott,
do you have something to say? Thank you.
I do not have anything further to say
Who seconded.
Counselor Pride. Usually
We, we move for passage 'cause we have a lot to say.
Um, I have a lot to say.
Um, I, you know, I I really appreciate
that we moved quickly with this.
I know it seems like it lasted a long time,
but this is actually our first meeting since enhanced
enforcement began,
Um, since January 20. Yeah,
Yeah. Yeah. So
we didn't know it was going to begin.
It started, it happened when we were not,
when we had no sessions between the,
now this has really been our first opportunity
to speak about this and I really was hoping
that we'd be really positive in moving forward with this.
But I feel a lot of anger and I understand the anger.
I mean, honestly, there is an extent
to which this council has somewhat kept its head down.
And I think my own personal feeling about that is
that from the beginning of the current administration,
we've seen public official,
after public official being specifically targeted
and personally attacked by this administration
and made suffer.
So my strategy, you know, in the beginning
of my most recent term
and as this administration came back, was to
quietly advocate for people who are marginalized
to point out to law enforcement here in here in South
Portland, that we had already previously in 2017,
enacted a resolve that stated
that law enforcement cannot work
with immigration enforcement.
And that there were existing law that we could rely on
and not paint a target on all our backs personally.
And sort of move forward in
and take steps like that as we move forward.
Because it, it's scary out there.
I mean, as everybody on this council knows,
I've had death threats about stuff
and it's been stuff far more innocuous
in my opinion than this.
It is not fun. Um, and it's scary for your family.
And this administration has really made no
buts about their willingness to target people personally.
And if someone had suggested this resolution to me,
you know, a month ago, I would hesitate on us
really being that forward about it.
But then I saw the murders of Renee Good and Alex Prety
and I, we cannot remain silent.
I know it might be too late for them,
but we don't wanna see this happen again.
I thank God that we didn't have anybody
die in South Portland.
But I also am very frustrated with those people
who were picked up and moved outta state very quickly,
severed from all ties to their community with no support.
And it's devastating.
And I know it's been happening for a long time now.
And I understand that, that the sort of the look, uh, is,
well now it's here in Maine
and so now it's personal council pride.
So now he's talking about it.
But as I said before, I felt this way for a long time.
I've worked for causes that try to support immigrants and,
and uh, asylum seekers here in Maine.
And I've brought that viewpoint to council,
just not overtly in a way that would cause people
to target me as much as I could do it that way.
And so now I feel like, well, you know,
if people are being killed, if by ice and,
and then we need to just speak up
'cause it's sort of too late now to,
to worry about targets on our back at the very least.
'cause they're already there now. Yeah.
You know, regardless of whether we speak
or not, they're there.
Um, so I think it's, it's important
to say what we're gonna say.
Um, I think it's a bigger deal than,
than maybe other people do that we're speaking up.
I understand there's more work to do
and I want to do more work.
I want to do it within a framework that's going to be
challengable by, um, anybody and survive that challenge
because we don't know who's going
to challenge anything that we do.
It might even be the federal government
that challenges something we do.
And if it doesn't withstand that child under, uh,
or that challenge under our own state laws, then
it's somewhat pointless.
So that's my feeling about this.
Uh, I'm very happy to vote for this resolution
and I'm happy to get creative about these things.
Um, and I am, I'm sad
that this happened at the end of the night.
I get that and, and I understand that frustration.
Um, but these agendas, as
as the city manager has told us many times, they kind
of get put together as things come in.
And we've moved stuff around
before, probably should have done it again this time.
I don't know if I realized how long
that workshop was actually going to take us.
Um, but you know, that's
kind of beyond us now.
And, and I'm sorry that we, none of us thought to amend the,
the schedule to put that farther up.
Anyway, that's all I have to say.
Thank you Councilor Pride. Anyone else?
Yeah, I'd like to say that, uh, I think it's,
uh, irritates me that we're up here,
we're trying to do a good thing.
We work all week long.
Councilors works at 24 7 as some, as you know.
'cause you email us at one o'clock in the morning
and you get up here at this podium
and then you start chastising us
for trying to do a good job.
Well, you know what, if you have the right to stand up here
and judge us by the way we do things,
then I'm gonna sit here and judge you.
By the way you are commenting to us,
especially when you say you keep us here all night
because you came in late.
You email me at 1:00 AM I'm sitting
there reading it at 1:00 AM
All right, counselor Matthew.
So I just want to say that we are
trying to do a good thing.
We're doing a good thing. So let's celebrate it
instead of chastising it.
Thank you. Ending on a positive note there. Thank you.
Anyone else? Alright folks,
I think we're gonna vote for this resolution now.
All in favor. Thank you.
That is a unanimous vote of the South Portland City Council.
Alright, unbelievably, we still have more agenda items
to get through City clerk.
Please read the next one.
Ordinance number 16 25 26 amending chapter 27 zoning
regarding coal storage.
This is the first reading
and passage requires majority votes.
Okay. Um, what are we doing again?
Um, any councilors have there? Oh, did you raise your hand?
Natalie, you have a question? No. Okay.
Did you wanna talk about it?
Explain You want me to No, yes. Well,
We typically do the, Alright, sorry.
Sorry, I thought somebody was saying it. Sorry.
You were accidentally almost put on the spot.
So, um, back on, uh, September 9th,
councilor West proposed
and obviously two other councils agreed with the workshop
to discuss ordinance amendment that would prohibit, um,
large scale coal storage in the city.
Um, this was prompted by a similar action
that occurred across the bridge in Portland.
Um, and, uh,
and then it ultimately was decided
that it could come just simply forward for a first read.
So our planning director, Milan Ida Corporation Council,
Brandon Maser, have been working on a zoning amendment
that would achieve this goal.
You'll know in the red line document, um,
that it essentially prohibits large scale, uh,
coal storage throughout the city.
Um, small scale storage like, um,
that a household would use, for example,
to heat their own home, um, would be allowable.
But that would be limited to one ton of storage.
So, um, this was reviewed by the planning board.
They met on, uh, the 28th.
They voted five nothing to recommend approval.
They did also recommend council approve, um,
or consider increasing the limit, um, for that, um,
residential, uh,
coal household coal storage from one ton to five ton.
Um, and so if, if you have questions about that, um,
Milan can elaborate further.
Um, I do wanna invite Milan up to talk about, um, any, uh,
other things that he feels like he needs to add
and also give time for Brandon, uh, to weigh in on anything
that he wants to add about this as well.
I have nothing to add. Okay. No, good heavens.
I did such a good job that, uh, anything that
I, I really don't have anything to, I'm happy
to answer any, any questions that may come up about it.
Um, I will ask council if there's questions.
I, councilor West, do you want to go first
or to say anything about this?
I, I'm not putting Councilor West on the spot for no reason.
I think she has some background on this issue.
I, I just felt it.
I believe it's important for South Portland to parallel
what has been done in Portland
and that's the reason for bringing this forward.
The one ton is the same number
as used in the Portland ordinance.
So I would suggest that we stick with that number.
Okay. And then Counselor Scott,
I thought your na hand went up.
I was gonna ask how much one ton of coal actually is,
is that a container?
Sorry. I can tell you the reason
that it was used in the Portland ordinance.
According my second question was if, is this reflective
of the Portland ordinance?
So I, I'm supportive of this generally.
I just was curious, sorry to ask a curious question.
At 10 o'clock at night,
We, we did take, um,
quite a bit of guidance from the Portland ordinance.
Um, one distinction is Portland was reacting to
a referendum at the time,
and where it landed in, in their code is different.
Um, we saw this more as a land use, um, provision.
So we put it into the land use chapter, chapter 27.
Um, so that's why it went to the planning board, uh,
for recommendation and came back here.
Um, the size
of one time was discussed in Milan media will at least give
a better general sense of what that
Looks like there. I've
seen photos, but
I, and I can say if, if you were to believe ai,
which you can't always trust, um, one ton
of coal occupies approximately 40 cubic feet.
So you can think of that as, uh, roughly equivalent
to the volume of 5 55 gallon, um, drums
of, of, uh, yeah. So.
Okay. Thank you. Okay.
Um, Milan, you have decided you are are not adding anything.
You're not adding anything. Okay.
Um, alright. Do we have, pardon me? Yes. Council West.
Can I just explain? It's my understanding
that the reason Portland used the one ton is that there's a,
um, a, uh, blacksmithing shop that still works
with coal and they needed to be able to store a ton
to have an adequate supply.
I have not heard of anything in South Portland that actually
Do we have a blacksmithing shop
Appropriate.
I love a good blacksmithing
Shop, so sounds like a, a gap so long
as they sell coffee calling. Um,
The one that I can add on on that note is we did do,
so we don't have an inventory of coal users in the city.
Um, I think at some point I sent an all caps question
wondering who's using coal in South Portland.
Um, but we do have assessing records that document the fuel,
uh, primary heating fuel source for occupancies in the city.
Um, unfortunately coal is listed,
but it's listed together with wood.
Um, when we look at just those, it's about 39 records.
Um, two of which are residential, single family residential.
Anecdotally, uh, I was surprised to find that
after you asked the question, three people had, had,
had housing in South Portland at one point in time
and had a coal heating source.
So it's, it's probably likely we have some coal users in
town for their primary heating source.
It's probably under five users.
Um, the most of those were, um, commercial applications
and it's hard to tell whether it was wood or coal,
but it's a thing.
Okay. Wow.
Um, okay.
It doesn't look like anybody has any questions.
Do we have any more questions?
Um, oh, do you actually her passage or am I public comment?
No, we have to do public comment. I'll learn one day.
Is there any public comment on our coal ordinance?
All righty. I don't think there is shocking.
Um, public comment is closed.
What is the wish of the council councilor
prize move for passage?
Thank you, council Counselor Scott.
Um, we could really mix it up and let the second go first,
but Counselor Pride, do you have anything to say? Um,
I, you know, I think this is appropriate.
I'm glad there's a one ton, uh,
because honestly I want, I want to continue doing the amount
of barbecuing I already do.
So, um, I appreciate that limit. Uh, no.
Um, I'm in support. I'm not sure. I think this makes sense.
Yeah, that is all
Counselor Scott.
Thank you Counselor Pride.
Thank you. I, I appreciate, I actually heard this in one
of my earlier council meetings
as I was exploring the opportunity of joining the council
and was glad to see it come before us
and think it's a good move.
So good luck blacksmiths
and barbecuers,
but I think this makes sense for our city. Yep.
Um, I'm not sure the kind
of coal you use at a barbecue is
what we're talking about here, so, no, I mean,
God forbid we start a a rumor they gets a little crazy.
God no. Uh, counselor
West, I just, I just wanna observe
that we have such a great planning director
and that is so typical of you that you would go
and really do the factual research
and I wanna give you a lot of compliments for doing that.
I think that's great. I I
still haven't heard anybody complaining about the one 10
though, so let's go for it.
Okay. Are we ready to vote on this item?
Feels like we might be. Um, and we don't need, okay.
It's first read, blah blah, blah. We don't need, alright.
All in favor? That is a unanimous vote of the council.
Thank you very much.
We've now gotten to order 1 46. Would you like to read that?
Madam City Clerk Order
1 46 25 26 adopting the city council's 2026 goals passage
requires majority vote.
Okay. Thank you so much.
Um, to catch you up on the, on our, on our program,
um, the council did have a publicly noticed meeting
to discuss and draft goals for 2026.
Um, we're bringing those forward
and we need to adopt them.
There may possibly be some suggested changes.
I guess we're about to find out. Um, I'm just looking.
Yeah, there, they're Okay. Sorry.
I needed to see my own screen better.
Um, do we have any, I think we, could we go crazy
and say that council is, well no we can't
'cause we would wanna hear public comment.
Nevermind. Um,
let's just see if we have any questions about our
own goals right now.
If we do not. Do we have anyone who'd like
to make public comment about our goals?
Why we do
Good evening Mayor, members of the council.
I like to say I've enjoyed this evening,
but I'm not quite sure.
Well, you're still Gonna have to,
I, I want to come up seriously. I want come,
You're still gonna have to say your
name even though we know it.
Oh, Tim Honey. Um, on, on High Street. Thank you so much.
And I'm, uh, the coordinator of Toss the Tanks campaign.
I, I just was very, very pleased to see the goal number six,
uh, talked, talked about meeting the goals
that are in the comprehensive plan and,
and trying to take some action and move forward on that.
So thank you very much.
And I just wanna say on behalf of toss the tanks,
I think the city and toss the tanks are gonna be rowing in
the same direction coming this year.
I think we have some amazing things that, that,
that are, are happening.
I really want to keep the city in the loop.
And I have a question for Scott here.
And I assume that when things come up that are important
and we need some additional input, um,
I'm working very closely with, with, with, uh,
councilor Walker on this.
But from a staffing standpoint, I, I would turn
to the planning department
or the economic development department in terms of, of, uh,
putting any questions or keeping them in the loop.
And I just wanna see if that was,
was was the right approach.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Would anyone else like to make any comment about
the council goals for 2026?
No. Alright. Public comment on that is closed.
What is the wish of our council?
Oops. You quickly answer the question. Oh, sorry.
Yeah, I, I think on an issue this where it's a council goal,
it probably make sense to include the council myself
economic development and planning.
So if it, if it's not too much to ask, just include all
of us on those messages.
And um, and I think that
that way everyone has the same
information, so that'd be great.
Ready?
Alright. Um, thank you very much.
Sorry, I swoosh over that.
Alright, now what is the wish of our council?
Do we have someone who would like to move
for passage of the goals?
It looks like Counselor West is moving in. I'll move
For passage of the resolution,
but, um, the funniest thing is
that the goals are kind of separate.
They're not exactly incorporated in the resolution.
So maybe we have some wording changes on the goals.
Yeah, I'm, I am, tell me how this happened
because I think all that the council has ever seen
is the goals that had a lot with them.
And then on the position paper, I, I understand they were,
it seems like it's summarized
to actually frankly sound more like goals
and less like the strategies that go with the goals.
But now we have a council goals, PDF
that has the actual goals
and then on the order we don't really have any goals. So
The order is referencing that other attachment?
It's, it's, I mean it might not be called a highlight
report, but that it is
by reference adopting the prior attachment.
Okay. So that's how we've done it in the past.
So the attachment is what counsel put together and has seen.
Yep. Mm-hmm. And then the summary
goals on the position statement, we are just
what I'm saying, sort of a summary for the position paper.
Yep. You got it. Alright.
So counsel, what we're voting on is the more detailed
that we put together at our meeting.
Is that clear? Yes. Everybody. Alright.
Anyone have any amendments, any, anything
that they would like to suggest
or are we council?
No. Councilor West? Yes.
On number eight, I think it's important
to reference the one climate future as part of the plans
that we're concerned about.
Okay. To implement revenue such as they,
and then we would insert one climate future plan,
comma Willard master beach plan and, okay. Yes.
I, that sentence however I think is awkward
because I understand the concept,
but in inserting the words relevant
and reasonable where it says to implement relative, relevant
and reasonable adopted plans.
I mean, all of our adopted plans
are relevant and reasonable.
What we're really talking about is
to implement adopted plans consistent
with resources and what, I mean, we we're
All right. A couple of
things. One,
I think maybe if you're suggesting edits, that has
to be an amendment.
Except this isn't really a resolution,
This is just a Yeah, that's true.
Word a thing. Where
Is Mr. Robert? Yes,
I would like to just be individuals
who discuss this and not have to do amendments and such,
but yeah, I'm just trying to,
I I mean I figure It out you trying
to the hour and everything.
My answer to you is
that I do remember at our goal setting session,
substantial discussion about whether relevant
and reasonable belong there.
And it seemed to be the majority felt it did,
but does anyone else have a different memory?
I no, I do remember that
because reasonable would include financial
Yes. Financially
Feasible At the time. Then I'll back off on that.
Alright, so,
but I don't think maybe we don't have
to have a full scale amendment to insert one climate future.
I think we can just call it edited. Okay. Yes.
Do you two have questions?
I would just like to ask that we spell out words like ped
and auto, you know, that we amend them so that
they don't reflect the, uh, franticness of the note taker.
Okay. At the, at the meeting who was trying to capture
what everyone said, and we actually spell out the words of,
of bicycle, pedestrian and automobile
and other places in here that have kind
of the, um, abbreviations
That seems a relevant and reasonable suggestion.
Um, yes. Okay.
Anyone else suggesting casual edits that aren't so casual?
Yes.
My, my only recommended edit to the relevant
and reasonable, which I remember deep discussion on was, I,
I think the intent was that it was relevant
and reasonable aspects of adopted plans.
Not necessarily that the plan itself
was relevant and reasonable.
Like the plan is relevant, it was adopted, I think it was
that the city continued to actually implement those plans.
So relevant and reasonable aspects of adopted plans,
If that makes it more relevant
and reasonable to our goals.
Sorry, I think if there's no objection,
the the clerk can just make
Yes, I think that's where we're at.
Like the minutes. Alright. Did you get that Jessica?
I, I have Captured them yesterday. All right.
And I think you're, Thank you. Okay.
Alright counselors, we've got goals,
so maybe we should adopt some.
Are they relevant in reason semester?
Yes. I moved to, to adopt the amended goals.
Second. Wait, the edited, I don't have a motion.
Wasn't there already a motion on the
Floor? I think we
already did that. Didn't some someone else? No.
Sorry. I thought there was needed an a
motion to amend, but maybe not. 'cause it's not a
Absolute research. I think we're just
asking that the
Clarify because Edits without objection.
Yeah. And the order already states
that the report be hereby accepted as amended.
So we're really just passing an order. Right.
So if the order needs, if the order contained anything,
we'd have to amend that.
But the order doesn't contain anything. It just,
I'm just here to make incorrect motions. Okay.
Alright. You have a roll?
Did you want me to re pardon me?
Yes, I think we're ready.
I think we are ready to vote counselors
before anything else happens.
All in favor of passing the goals. Thank you.
As amended as the order said, or we can say it twice.
Thank you. That is a unanimous passage. Gotta say it twice.
All righty. We are going to go to order. 1 47. Thank you.
Order 1 47, 25 26. Acceptance of our grants and donations.
Passage requires majority vote. We have a few this evening.
We have a parks
and recreation donation for $1,500
for the lacrosse fund for registration.
In support of the team, we have a general assistance heating
donation in $2,500.
And the last item is our lost
and found city policy for municipal buildings.
We have a sum of $248
and 62 cents that needs to be accepted into,
um, our general fund.
That has not been claimed.
Yes. Do you, did everybody read what that actually means?
I did. I don't remember now. Yeah, so it basically,
it is the, it is the policy that if
monies are just found, um, they're not going to be,
oh look, I found this.
The city employee doesn't go, oh, I look, I just found this,
it's mine that it, it all go, it gets reported
and it goes as a donation to the general fund.
And this year's donation is $248 and 62 cents.
So, okay.
Do we have any questions or discussion?
Do we have any public comment?
We added an item to the agenda to ask questions.
Yes, yes. Where Do you plan to have that
One? I think we better
have it very much next.
Um, but let's vote to accept the donations. All in favor?
Wait, you need to pass this. Wait. Oops, sorry.
Do nobody Motion, motion general assistant a second.
I'm sorry. Thank you. Counselor Matthews.
I'll second thank you for the second. We're getting punchy.
Let's vote to accept the grants and donations. Thank you.
That is unanimous.
Alright, we had an item added that council approved
to allow the city manager to hear
what questions counselors may have that will need
to be answered at our facilities workshop on February 17th.
So I believe Councilor West, you'd like
to ask some questions or, yeah,
I'm sorry that it got to be so late.
I do think that questions
that this is a really complicated process
and, uh, some unforeseen things
and we just need to say these questions so I just,
I'm gonna say them and then I'll email them.
But bond rating.
I remember hearing that South Portland has the highest bond
rating of any city in Maine.
I'd like to know if that's accurate.
Is our bond rating related to the amount
of debt that we have?
How much additional debt can we issue
and still maintain our bond rating?
With respect to the current use
of Mahoney over the time since Mahoney became vacant,
what have been the cost to maintain the building
and what revenue have we received from
activities taking place there?
If we continue this arrangement,
what does the design team think about the impact on the
building of leaving it largely onus?
With respect to the fire station,
how much has the current Fire Central Fire Station
deteriorated in the last five years?
Police, when was the dispatch center moved from South
Portland to Portland?
What is the reason it was moved?
Also with regard to police, the same question with regard
to fire as concerning the deterioration,
how much has the current police station
deteriorated in the last five years?
Um, with respect to buildings that we have built
and individual outstanding bonds,
you've personally given me this information,
but I think it should be included
specifically on the agenda,
particularly the Western AAV fire in 2003.
Uh, the cash corner Fire station 2020
and the Ruon Municipal Services facility in 2016 opened in
2017 given concerns about turning,
tearing down the old fire station instead of repurposing to
a use, let's talk about a new location
for the new fire station.
Can fire meet its response time
with locations at the Hill Street Tank Farm?
If the city obtained a site on some portion
of the non-operating PPLC property,
How large a site would be needed
for new fire station building.
If we are starting with a new site,
how large a site would be needed for a new police station
building If we choose another site other than Mahoney,
how large a site would be needed if we combine
police and fire facility?
Have we explored any other ways constructing
or financing an entirely new police
or fire facility such as lease purchase
or design build that would reduce the
burden on the taxpayers?
Have we explored other ways of financing Mahoney such as
contracting with a private developer who could use,
who might be able to use various tax credits
or, uh, charitable donation kinds of accounting?
And, uh, we have information at the National Guard facility
on Western Ave will be available in the next few years
as also indicated on those TIF maps.
Uh, have we, uh, I would like to talk about the next steps
to consider acquiring that piece of property
for public use. And that's it.
Thank you very much. Councilor West, again, we had said
that this would be an opportunity for counselors to,
if they felt they needed to make public their questions
that they will bring to the workshop on the 17th,
you could do so now.
And it does not mean you can't come up
with additional questions
or that you can't just send email
to the staff with your questions.
But if you would like to know the public to know,
you'll be asking those questions
and you'd like that to happen.
Now this is the time.
Oh, sorry. I thought mute. Yes, counselor Scott.
Um, I, I'm happy to try and email these two as well,
but I think I wanted to expand on one question
that Natalie had about, um, the tax credit opportunity
as a historic building.
I don't know if new markets, but the tax credit opportunity
for private developer that I don't think fully relinquish
the ownership or longer term use of Mahoney.
Um, the other question that I had out
of the Mahoney committee meeting that I attended last week
was, what is the actual plan for
the services police
and fire in the interim when
buildings are being constructed?
And I think especially fire
there is not necessarily a plan to build a new facility
and then move them to that facility.
So I think my question to, I think the facilities team, if
that's the right, uh, personnel is
what is the plan for that kind of relocation timeline,
even if we were to go fully forward with the full plan.
Um, and I think those were my two kind of main questions out
of our last meeting
and the Mahoney committee meeting that we had last week.
Okay. And I'm happy to try
and email those to you, Scott, and if I have
more, I'm happy to add those, but
Sounds good. I
just, I, I don't want us to have the,
the anyone have any questions you need to post to Scott
that you feel need to be heard publicly?
I don't see anyone else clamoring at this point.
So I think we've completed our mission with
that agenda item.
I hope people feel that way.
We are not voting on anything with that agenda item, um,
citizen discussion.
We have another opportunity for open comment
if anyone would like to make any public comment.
Thank you.
Hi, Alex Redfield, Cooper Street.
I wanted to first apologize
for opening any floodgates in my initial public statement
that led the discussion astray from the text
of the resolution upon hearing some
of the counselor's justification for how they showed up.
Uh, thinking about this resolution,
I specifically wanna appreciate the work
that you guys are doing, staying late,
answering emails 24 7.
Uh, you know, all of these things are real
and do appreciate the work and role and power that you play.
And just wanna say that transparently, um,
because your role is so complicated and
because you're dealing with pressure from
interlopers like me
and emails at weird times, I wanted to explicitly offer,
if you're not hearing from constituents
who are feeling the immediacy of this moment,
there are residents who are hearing it right now.
We're seeing it, we're seeing people getting kicked out.
It's the third of the month rent was due two days ago.
There's no options.
And so yes, we are taking, uh,
I think it was maybe like 25 total minutes
of a council meeting to try
to express the immediacy that we are hearing.
Not with any unique insight into the immigrant experience in
South Portland, but as people that have friends
and care about our neighbors, we are hearing it,
we are seeing it, and it needs to be communicated.
And I don't know, when I send emails to council, if
that's processed, I sometimes get responses
and I really appreciate it
because you're getting them from more people than just me.
But I'm gonna take my minutes to say it and I'm gonna say it
whenever I can and you can correct me
and redirect me to other periods.
But I hope you know that that message is there
and that this is a conduit
of information that we're trying to offer.
Yes, there's anger, but it's
information that we're trying to share.
And I really appreciated your reflection
counselor pride on how the council showed up at the last,
when the last eviction moratorium was considered.
And to hear that it was done maybe at some skepticism from
corporation council is a really
important thing to note, right?
We don't, I guess I missed it was doing bedtime when we
heard the report on
where the corporation council question was,
but maybe there's going
to be some skepticism from legal counsel
and that's totally understandable.
That's their job is to advise you about what risk to take
and the extent of that risk.
And it is the council's prerogative to take the risk.
And even if it does run up against a lawsuit in state court,
it is not for naught.
It is sending a really clear message
and pumping the brakes on a time sensitive issue right now.
And for, yeah,
I just wanna express the immediacy in another way.
30 seconds And enjoy the 30 seconds. Thanks.
Thank you. Thank you. Anyone else?
Open public comment
If you think, again, my name is Hannah Taner.
I live on Florence Street.
Um, I have a question and some comments. Um, Mr.
Morelli, I believe you mentioned
that there's a $16.8 million fund
for emergencies.
I, I understand there was a $2 million that were at the end
of the initial fund,
but I'm wondering if there's a $16.8 million fund
that's used for emergencies such as COVID.
You can answer that later.
But my question is, is this not like COVID?
So, um, I can tell you a few stories.
I've been delivering groceries.
I have friends who are citizens.
I have friends who are immigrants and seeking asylum.
They're legally in the process, whatever people
of color are being targeted.
Now, when I look around this space, um,
the folks in this space to me seem white passing.
I don't know if you all are white or not,
but like the folks who are here were, were white passing.
Um, and so from what I can see, none of us are individuals
who would be targeted as a store for the color of our skin
or the languages that we're speaking.
Um, but those individuals are highly at risk.
And I had a friend the other night who, um, he said,
maybe you could just pick me up
and bring me to your home so I could just be around people,
um, to feel safer to hear people talking.
Because right now he's sitting alone after dark in his home.
He doesn't dare turn on any lights
and he's sitting alone every night.
And when he has his son with him, when his son is
with him at night, they're sitting alone in dark,
in the dark every night
because they're scared about turning the lights on
and having people see that they are home.
And so this is a trauma that's happening on top of COVID.
This is like a second wave, right?
And this might not be felt by me,
this might not be felt by some of you.
I don't know what your experience is
or who the people that you know are,
but this is very serious trauma that's happening.
And as it's been shared
that this is having immediate consequences for folks.
You know, I, um, have I dropped off groceries
to someone last night?
Um, and yeah, there's like all the things
that people are doing and it's really incredible.
Um, but I just would urge you if there is a larger fund
to consider this the exact moment that we need
to be considering using that fund.
Um, and like these are our community members.
These are the people who brighten our lives
and, uh, make Maine a more beautiful place.
Um, I grew up in rural Maine
and unfortunately I had, it was wasn't until high school
that I had one person of color that I got to know, um,
in my hometown.
Um, and now it is very different from that.
But it isn't inevitable that it stays like that. Okay?
Like if we, if we, if people are evicted, then
they won't be able to stay here
and they'll be a lot less safer time
and a lot more easily detained. Thank you.
Thanks very much. Anyone else?
Alright, I don't see anyone else.
So sit, oh, sorry, sorry.
Um, Julia Edwards, Dawson Street, a couple things
because I promised my neighbors on a separate issue
that anytime I was here, um, I would bring it up.
Um, we've totally lost the plot on what's going on
with the Dawson Street lot and I don't know when
or if that's coming before you as far
as whatever the Planning Appeals Board has come up with.
Um, but just please keep an eye on that.
Um, an update would be great.
Um, you know, just, it's, it's bad.
Um, neighbors are being offered, uh, deals and
and approach to by the solar power company
that supposedly is not part of the deal or approved.
Um, they're being asked to give, be given money
to put power lines on their, like poles on their property.
So somebody's moving forward even though it's
not a approved project.
Um, so that's separate.
Um, second of all, I wanna apologize for offending
anyone in this room on this board.
Um, councilor Matthews,
if I touched off a nerve there, I apologize.
And also that's the deal.
Like if you are upset about something
that you hear from the public, if it's our tone,
if we're not approaching it in the, a nice polite manner,
it may be because we're getting like an hour
of sleep a night because we're out there in the community
and also living our lives.
And also, like, I'm not gonna sit here
and play a play a game of who has it harder
because I guarantee no one in this room has it as hard
as the people who we are seeing their families
being taken off the street.
Children who are afraid to leave their homes.
Like if you don't understand what that feels like,
maybe you need to spend some time on social media
and watch it because it is horrible.
Something has been irretrievably broken in our community.
The trauma that is going to be felt for generations here,
it's earth shattering.
And if you don't believe that
or understand it, I can't help you.
But that says more about you, capital Y as a person than,
and not this council, but people in general than
it does about those
of us who are trying to do some good here.
Um, so I won't apologize
for expecting more from my elected officials.
I won't apologize for wanting
to see more courage in a time when it is necessary.
And I think it's warranted.
This is a crisis and if, if you don't agree
or you're not up to it, then maybe
make room for someone who is.
Um, thank you.
Okay, thank you. Um, anyone else?
Alright, now public comment is closed
and we're going to have Scott answer a couple of questions
that were asked and yeah. Yep.
So the two questions. So the,
there's a question about the 16.8 million.
I apologize, I I didn't elaborate on that enough.
That's a city council policy.
Those are generally recommended by auditors that you place,
um, aside from your un-designated fund balance between nine
and 12% of your overall budget.
So round number South Portland has a budget
of about 140 million city school, county tax,
metro assessment, water resource protection, all that.
So that means we're setting aside, um, you know, 14 ish
around million dollars, give
or take a few million on either side so
that if something happens, like, um, it,
when I mentioned COVID, it wasn't that
so we could give money out to, to support businesses, it was
because we're gonna start taking less money
and people are gonna stop buying cars.
So we get less excise tax people aren't going out
and, uh, frequenting businesses, so there's gonna be less,
uh, personal property.
So that's really to cover, you know, we still need
to pay police and fire
and we still need to pay for the schools and everything.
So that's really, uh, that's what that reserve is for.
So that, that, I apologize, I didn't clarify that.
Um, uh, more clearly.
So after you kind of factor out again, the, the overage
for the school, the money that we'd spend on that we need
to spend on fire trucks next year
or road projects that leaves about that 2 million
that council has a little bit more discretion over.
Um, so hopefully that helps to clarify some things.
And then in terms of Dawson Street, if you want to, um,
shoot me an email, our planning director, um,
recently sent out an update to a bunch of folks in
that neighborhood, um, within the past probably four days
or so that gave them an update on what's going on.
So if you're not part of that list, um, I'd be happy
to forward that update to you
and make sure that Milan also
sends you those updates as well. Gave
A gotten mail and like a Week.
So no email, I'm sorry, yeah. Email list. Sorry. Yeah. Yep.
Yeah, I know the mails. I was gonna say.
Okay. Alright, good things have happened. Mr.
City Manager, do you have anything to report to us? Yeah,
I'll just, um, the, the one thing that I shared counsel,
uh, a memo the mayor had asked, um, last week if, uh, what,
what some sort of a loan
or grant program to businesses impacted by the, um, ice, uh,
um, presence in South Portland
and Maine over the past, uh, couple of weeks,
um, might look like.
And so, um, you know,
we only had a few days to kind of look into this.
So one of the first things that we did is, uh,
sometimes it's good a municipal government
to copy other successful programs, see what others are doing
and see if that might be replicated.
So, um, our economic development staff reached out
to Portland, Scarborough, uh,
and Westbrook, I believe it was those three communities
to kinda say, Hey, what, what are you all hearing?
Are you, are you hearing needs from your businesses?
Uh, because we hadn't heard any,
but have, are you all hearing that?
Um, what are you all planning to do?
Um, none of them right now have any
plans to set up a program.
So there wasn't anything we found that we could say, Hey,
this is, this is what Portland's doing.
So yeah, maybe this is something
that the council could consider.
Uh, we did learn though that the greater Portland Council
of Governments did send out a targeted survey.
Um, I think to, from what I understand, to primarily, um,
minority owned businesses to see what impacts, uh,
they may have felt over the past few weeks if they're
experiencing lost revenue, might need assistance.
And so the data from
that survey will be available at the end of this week.
So, um, what our intent would be is to take a look at
that data, uh,
because there will be many South Portland businesses, um,
that they said were included in that.
Have that, uh, information, uh,
and see what that might tell us about whether
or not, um, you know, the, the city,
if there's a need there, the city council may want
to pursue, uh, such a program.
Um, we did look, we, we did also look, you know, outside
of Maine, outside of our region to see
what other communities are doing.
We didn't search every corner of the web,
but um, uh, our economic development folk found two other
examples of these types of programs.
One is in Los Angeles County,
the other is in, uh, Minneapolis.
They're not necessarily direct government programs
that are providing assistance.
They're run through nonprofits.
Maybe there's some municipal support.
Um, but, uh, we, we couldn't find anything yet, uh, for,
from a local government's strictly perspective, um,
that we could also kind of say, Hey, here's what, you know,
Boston has done, or, uh, Boise, Idaho has done,
or something like that, uh, that we,
that we could replicate.
So where we're leaving it is we'll take a look at those
survey results, we'll let you know what they find.
Um, if there appears to be some sort
of a need there from the businesses,
we can certainly bring back, uh, some sort of an outline of
what a program might look like.
Um, if there isn't, uh, we would probably want
to hear from the council as to whether
or not that's something you want to spending time on.
Um, so, uh, so ultimately
that's, uh, that's where we landed.
And I'll other aside from that, given the hour,
I'll cut any sort of other report short and call it.
Good. You are too kind.
Um, but thank you so much for that research.
Um, we did hear from a couple of people who compared it
to getting a micro grant during COVID for their business
and how incredibly helpful they found something like that.
So thank you for investigating.
Alright, we have counselors round robin.
Does anyone dare have anything for round robin?
Just very briefly. Thank you.
Um, and it is
that I do call Senator Collins office in DC
um, every Monday through Friday.
And I have, I was really surprised I got to talk
to a person today
and yesterday my, you get about two minutes.
So I've made it brief
and I want you to know what I actually, I'll read
very briefly, just the biggest part of what I asked for
my big well, I asked her
to vote no on increase the department of, um, of,
uh, DHS, uh, safety Homeland,
how Homeland Safety Department of Homeland Safety,
no more money and put a, uh, hiring freeze on ice
to, uh, unmask, uh, to actually follow laws
and that due process
and uh, judicial warrants because they're rogue.
And I want you to know it is not ice that who has executed
the people in Minnesota.
It has been customs border and patrol and not new agents.
Some of, uh, two of those men have been
workers for over 10 years.
And we had one in Maine who was not at that,
I can't think it was Los Angeles at someplace
that they blocked her car off, said that she was the one
and they, he was proud initially
that she had seven bullet wounds in the only
used five bullets.
That was the Maine boy.
Uh, so I've asked for other things that I won't say
because I probably will get threats.
Alright, so that's it. Do call it makes a difference.
They record it you.
Um, and if you call, you can make it on a recording.
And so I go straight to DC and I've skipped the main office.
Thank you that, thank you.
Um, anyone else have anything for round robin?
Just real quick, happy birthday to my wife.
I should have stayed home with you.
We would've missed you counselor Matthew. Yes,
We would have Very much.
Um, alright, well if we have no other, oh,
do we have some round robins? Well come on.
Chirp. Yes. Sorry, I, I know it's late,
but I, um, I actually would,
I know we have been discussing other opportunities
for support
and I think I would like the city to explore
some sort of a fund
or even an opportunity for people to donate into
that fund if it's possible
to provide some rent relief similar to business relief.
Um, I appreciate, I think this is actually a much more deep
and difficult trauma than COVID for many reasons.
Um, so I think it'd be great if the council,
I realize we don't have, I,
I realize we don't have an extra $16 million lying around,
but I do think it'd be helpful if there was some ability
to provide, similar to general assistance, uh,
a rent relief fund above
and beyond just requesting an eviction moratorium
as we have done in our resolution.
Okay. If that's Appropriate to request.
Yes. I, yes, I I think I
what I hear you is, well nevermind, I just,
I I am aware of philanthropic efforts Yeah.
That are already collecting monies, but,
and at first I thought that's what you were asking the city
to also do.
And I think what you're saying is
can the city establish some sort of fund and maybe yes.
The city would also ask people to donate.
Is that what you were asking about?
Yes. Okay.
Accepting donations.
Alright. So, and I think you're hearing that
It would be helpful to have a fuller conversation on
that though because are, are we administering it?
How do we determine eligibility? How much funding?
So it probably lends itself to more of a workshop
unless it's just a pass through
to the other community organizations,
in which case we could set something up on the
website pretty easily for
That and for general assistance donations.
Yes. And also I will just add that we do know
that at the state level there is a fund established and well
before the immigration enforcement expansion happened,
there's a fund established for exactly that purpose relief
to prevent eviction.
Right now it doesn't have any money in it.
So if anyone wants to advocate at the state level,
at some point that's gonna come back
and they're gonna have to decide whether they're
putting money in there or not.
Alright. Um, anyone else wanna say anything?
Sing a song, tell a joke. Okay. I guess not.
Um, can we have a motion to adjourn? So moved.
I see a motion. I see a second. All in favor? I assume.
Oh yeah, we are adjourned. Mr. Matthew.